Understanding the global epidemic trends, geographic distribution, and transmission patterns of COVID-19 contribute to providing timely information for the global response of the epidemic. This study aims to understand the global pandemic geospatial patterns and trends and identify new epicenters requiring urgent attention.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.20.20039602 doi: medRxiv preprint
After the outbreak of COVID-19 in China, and after the epidemic turning better in China, the world outside of China started to experience an ongoing and worsening epidemic. According to the report of the World Health Organization (WHO), by 14 th Mar., 2020 a total of 142,539 cases have been reported in 136 countries and territories, and 9,769 new cases were reported on the single day of 14 th Mar. [1] Italy, Iran, and South Korea aside China have the highest number of confirmed cases (17,660; 11,364; 8086) as of 14 th Mar., 2020. [1] In response, highly affected countries have adopted innovative curbing interventions such as whole city lockdowns, the establishment of drive-through screening centers and banning large social gatherings amongst others to locally contain the virus and prevent further new cases. [2, 3] Affected and unaffected countries following WHO guidelines are developing or have commenced implementation of country-specific prevention, early case detection as well as quarantine and treatment policies. [4] Some countries have closed borders and/or suspended flight commutation with major affected countries including South Korea and Iran regardless of the WHO cautions. [5, 6] Such drastic measures are very essential in the pandemic control, but may also negatively affect the global economy if maintained over a longer duration as countries like China and South Korea contribute largely to global industrial production and provision of goods and services. [7, 8] Although some low-middle income countries (LMICs) in Africa remained unaffected for a while, 15 African countries and territories have reported a total of 73 confirmed cases as of 14 th Mar., 2020. [1] This furthers concerns of a pandemic as under-resourced LMICs in the region lack adequate infrastructures to successfully contain a breakout and are dependent on . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.20.20039602 doi: medRxiv preprint external sources for medical goods procurement. [4] Therefore, further spread of the virus threatens shortage to medical supplies and further outbreaks in LMICs could lead to high COVID-19 related mortality. [9] As such prompt responses and global strategic alliances are required immediately to prevent further outbreaks and avert the threatening pandemic.
As more countries get affected and the reported number of cases outside China keeps growing with each passing day, it is important to study the global disease outbreak, with especial focus on disease transmission, development trend, and new epicenters. Obtaining and analyzing this data will not only expand current knowledge on the disease global trends but also inform strategic planning and alliance for prompt global containment of the disease and prevention of further outbreaks.
This study aims to understand the global disease pandemic geo-spatial pattern, epidemic trends and identify new and emerging epicenters requiring urgent attention for decision making.
The research studied the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak at the aspects of the global epidemic trend, geographic transmission patterns, and the changes in disease distribution from 13 th Jan.
to 14 th Mar. 2020.
The disease data of China were collected from China's national health commission. The disease data outside of China were mainly collected from WHO daily COVID-19 situation . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.20.20039602 doi: medRxiv preprint reports, [1] except for the disease data before 19 th Jan. and the data about the origins of the first cases reported by each country and territory, which were collected from the news in terms of limited open-source data of COVID-19. The spatial data were derived from GADM version 3.6. [10] All the data were publicly available.
Statistical analyses were done using Joinpoint Trend Analysis version 4 7 0 0 Software (National Cancer Institute, USA) and R Studio software (R Core Team, 2016). The geographic outputs were generated by ArcGIS 10 2 software (Esri Inc, Redlands, California).
The pandemic disease outbreak was studied and analyzed through the epidemic trend over time by joinpoint regressions, the growth of infected countries and the number of infections over time, the global transmission routes of first reported cases in countries, and the geographic distribution over time by dynamic maps.
As of 14 th Mar., SRAS-CoV-2 has affected 134 countries and territories outside of China with 61,518 cases reported.
Globally, the joinpoint regression models showed that both the number of new cases and the number of cumulative cases were in rapid growth ( Figure 1A and 1B). The trend of new cases was on the first stage before 24 th Feb. (slope = 4 4), where the number increased slightly and was smaller than 300. The number of new cases was then rapidly accelerated at the second to . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 
The first COVID-19 cases in different countries was captured on three maps: 28 th Feb. (the date when WHO first classified the transmission type for affected countries), 7 th Mar., and 14 th Mar. (Figure 3 ). The maps showed that Italy and Iran were the new epidemic centers for exporting COVID-19 as majority of the newly affected countries were close to and reported their first cases originated from the two countries ( Figure 3 and Table S1 ). However, many neighboring countries and territories of Italy were affected and have developed local transmission compared to those of Iran, implying a faster spread of the disease in Europe than the Eastern-Mediterranean Region. For the affected countries in Africa and Latin America, many of them started to report COVID-19 cases in the week of 8 th -14 th Mar., when the disease spread quickly to the world and became a global pandemic. During this period, the first cases reported by the newly affected countries in Latin America and Africa were mainly imported from European countries, especially from Italy and France. The world was in a severe situation of the COVID-19 outbreak.
Dynamic maps of the disease distribution were produced to show the changes in new cases . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 2020. We found a multi-centers pandemic has been established. This study adds to the . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. another tsunami which will further worsen the pandemic. [12] LMIC countries should fully implement robust containment and control activities as suggested by WHO and evidenced by the Chinese experience. [13] Our study indicated that local transmission has been established in more than 50% of the countries that reported cases of COVID-19. The establishment of local transmission and the increase in the number of epidemic centers indicates a widespread and that a sustained transmission of COVID-19 has been established globally, and therefore, the war against . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint This study has some limitations. First, the data collected were from publicly available datasets.
They lacked detailed epidemiological information as well as the detailed geographic information on patients for further assessing the potential driving forces as well as more detailed geographic patterns of the pandemic. Secondly, our analysis is lagged by a time gap between when a suspected case identification and case confirmation, but it does provide time-sensitive and evidence-based information to aid in further response to the epidemic.
Finally, due to constraints of detection capability and technique, the underreporting of cases especially in developing countries may result in underestimation of the study.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.20.20039602 doi: medRxiv preprint 1 4 The funders had no role in study design, data collection, and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The authors thank all the people who contributed to this study.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.20.20039602 doi: medRxiv preprint 
