Background: The first case of COVID-19 atypical pneumonia was reported in Wuhan, China on December 1, 2019. Since then, at least 33 other countries have been affected and there is a possibility of a global outbreak. A tremendous amount of effort has been made to understand its transmission dynamics; however, the temporal and spatial transmission heterogeneity and changing epidemiology have been mostly ignored. The epidemic mechanism of COVID-19 remains largely unclear.
Methods: Epidemiological data on COVID-19 in China and daily population movement data from Wuhan to other cities were obtained and analyzed. To describe the transmission dynamics of COVID-19 at different spatio-temporal scales, we used a three-stage continuous-time Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Recovered (SEIR) meta-population model based on the characteristics and transmission dynamics of each stage: 1) local epidemic from December 1, 2019 to January 9, 2020; 2) long-distance spread due to the Spring Festival travel rush from January 10 to 22, 2020; and 3) intra-provincial transmission from January 23, 2020 when travel restrictions were imposed. Together with the basic reproduction number (ܴ ) for mathematical modelling, we also considered the variation in infectivity and introduced the controlled reproduction number (ܴ ) by assuming that exposed individuals to be infectious; we then simulated the future spread of COVID across Wuhan and all the provinces in mainland China. In addition, we built a novel source tracing algorithm to infer the initial exposed number of individuals in Wuhan on January 10, 2020, to estimate the number of infections early during this epidemic.
The spatial patterns of disease spread were heterogeneous. The estimated controlled reproduction number (ܴ ) in the neighboring provinces of Hubei province were relatively large, and the nationwide reproduction number − except for Hubei − ranged from 0.98 to 2.74 with an average of 1.79 (95% CI 1.77−1.80). Infectivity was significantly greater for exposed than infectious individuals, and exposed individuals were predicted to have become the major source of infection after January 23. For the . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint .
On December 1, 2019, a case of pneumonia of unknown etiology was reported in Wuhan, China, and a novel strain of coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) associated with the pneumonia case was subsequently isolated on January 7, 2020 1 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.27.20045757 doi: medRxiv preprint
Epidemiological data The daily cumulative numbers of confirmed and suspected   COVID-19 cases for the period from December 1, 2019 to February 8, 2020 were obtained from the National, Hubei Provincial and Wuhan Municipal Health and Family Planning Commissions. Due to a concern of under-reporting before January 20, 2020, data in this period were imputed and double-checked manually based on a range of sources, including local government reports, officially published literature and local hospital reports 9 .
The definitions of confirmed and suspected cases for COVID-19 have been described elsewhere in detail 8 . We only used data from confirmed cases in the modelling and included all provinces in mainland China except for Tibet and Xinjiang where only a few confirmed cases were reported.
Population movement data As the capital city of Hubei Province, Wuhan has more than 11 million residents and is connected to other major cities in China via frequent buses, high-speed trains, and commercial flights. It is the busiest traffic hub of central China. The daily population movement from and to Wuhan increased dramatically before the Lunar New Year (starting around January 10, 2020), which accelerated the spread of COVID-19 10, 11 . The daily population movement data into and out of Wuhan by types of transportation (i.e., long-distance bus, train and air) for the period January 10−23, 2020 were retrieved from an app-derived real-time location database provided by Baidu Huiyan Company, from which we constructed a travel volume matrix among different provinces.
We established a continuous-time but piecewise Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Recovered (SEIR) meta-population model to study the transmission dynamics of COVID-19. We considered transmission dynamics separately for each province. We modelled Wuhan city separately because of its heavy disease burden; other cities of Hubei province were modelled together. We divided the epidemic of COVID-19 into three developmental stages and the first two . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint .
stages were mainly focused on Wuhan, whereas in the last stage we considered epidemics in all provinces. Stage 1 commenced on December 1, 2019 when the first COVID-19 case was detected, and ended on January 8, 2020, prior to the mass Lunar New Year population movement. During this period, the disease mainly spread within Wuhan, and inter-provincial movement of infected people was ignored. The transmission dynamics are described by the following differential equations:
where ܰ denotes the population size of Wuhan, ܵ , ‫ܧ‬ , ‫ܫ‬ and ܴ ݉ denotes the number of susceptible, exposed (incubation), symptomatic and removed individuals, respectively. Although ‫ܫ"‬ " represents infectious individuals in traditional SEIR models, we assumed all exposed individuals were also infectious and used ‫ܫ‬ to represent the symptomatic phase. As it is not clear how prevalent is asymptomatic infection, we assumed for model simplicity that all exposed individuals move to the symptomatic phase. The infectiousness levels of exposed and symptomatic individuals are represented by the infection forces were detected outside Wuhan during this period, and therefore we still focused on . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.27.20045757 doi: medRxiv preprint Wuhan but added a migration term to reflect outbound human movement:
denotes the emigration rate, measured as the number of emigration Stage 3 commenced from January 23, 2020 when a lockdown was in effect in Wuhan.
Due to the strictly enforced travel ban, inter-provincial human movement was significantly reduced. Therefore, we assumed that the transmission dynamics in each province evolved independently. Here, Hubei province (excluding Wuhan) was regarded as a whole region. Considering that the tightened control policies reduced the contact frequencies of residents within each province, we added an attenuation
to the infection risk from exposed individuals in their incubation period, where ߙ is the attenuation coefficient specific to the i-th province. The model in this stage is described by:
where the subscript i indicates the i-th province, with ݅ ൌ 0 designated for Wuhan and ݅ ൌ 1
for the remaining cities of Hubei as a whole. Each province has its own . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.27.20045757 doi: medRxiv preprint infection forces. Recovery rate and mortality rate also differ by province, which is reasonable due to the heterogeneity in medical resources. The only parameter shared by all provinces is ߪ , the rate of disease development which depends more on the pathogen than on the population. Considering the fact that medical resources in Wuhan were exhausted first but improved later on with aid from other parts of the country, we add an enhancement term
to the case recovery rate:
The key parameters in the above models were estimated using MATLAB R2018b through the least square technique. The 95% confidence interval (95% CI) of the parameter was estimated by independently adding random terms to the initial parameter value during the fitting process. The models for different provinces were calibrated separately. To assess the goodness-of-fit of the models, we calculated correlation coefficients between simulated and observed data, i.e., between model-predicted cumulative number of infections and the reported cumulative 
For Stage 2 in Wuhan, we modify the above calculation considering the population movement:
For Stage 3, since some effects dependent on time evolution are taken into account not only in equation (10) for all provinces but also in equation (13) for Wuhan, we . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint 
To retrospectively identify the number of exposed individuals in Wuhan on January 10, we developed a simplified SE model to describe the transmission among the migrating population from Wuhan to the other provinces as follows: 
represents the proportion of individuals who traveled to the i-th province, and ݇ is a correction factor for infectivity given that the contacts in transportation vehicles are likely to be much closer than in the general society. In this model, we used parameters estimated in Stage 2 for Wuhan and the numbers of exposed individuals in the other provinces at the beginning of Stage 3 to infer the number of exposed individuals on January 10 in Wuhan, i.e. back-estimating in time.
The numbers of exposed individuals in the other provinces at the beginning of Stage 3
were calculated from the epidemiological data.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.27.20045757 doi: medRxiv preprint
The National Health Commission of China determined that the collection of data from human cases of COVID-19 was part of a continuing public health surveillance of a notifiable infectious disease and was thus exempt from institutional review board approval.
The funders of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report. The corresponding author had full access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.
The stage-specific and overall correlations between model predicted and observed cumulative case numbers were >0.9 for all the provinces with the exception of Wuhan in Stage 1 (Table 1 and in Supplementary Table 1) , which was 0.785. The less satisfactory correlation for the first stage in Wuhan city is likely caused by under-reporting during the early epidemic phase. Estimates of the key parameters in each epidemic stage are shown in Table 2 for
Wuhan and the rest of Hubei province. The results demonstrate that the estimated ܴ dropped drastically in Stage 2 for Wuhan and the estimated median controlled reproduction number (ܴ ) was significantly higher in Wuhan in Stage 3 compared to th rest of Hubei. In Stage 3, the infectivity of exposed individuals (ߚ ଶ ) was . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.27.20045757 doi: medRxiv preprint significantly higher than that of the infectious individuals for both Wuhan and the rest of Hubei, suggesting that the exposed individuals had become the major source of infection after January 23, 2020. We mapped the spatial distribution of province-specific To address the concern of under-reporting in Wuhan in Stage 1, we proposed a source tracing strategy implemented through transportation in Stage 2. With the estimated initial exposed individuals on January 23, 2020, the model is able to attain the epidemic situation in Stage 3 (Supplementary Table 3 ). The estimated number of exposed individuals on January 10, 2020 in Wuhan is a function of the correction factor ݇ and the number of infected individuals on January 10, 2020,
. As is shown in Table 3 , the number of initial exposed individuals decreases significantly as ݇ increases, and decreases slightly at a linear trend as ‫ܫ‬ increases. The estimated number of exposed individuals is much greater than the reported infectious individuals on January 17, 2020 (7 days or an incubation period after January 10, 2020) in Wuhan. 
The respectively) were about equal. However, in stage 3 the infectivity of exposed individuals was significantly greater than that of the infectious individuals, which was the case for most of the other provinces. When symptomatic individuals were isolated . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.27.20045757 doi: medRxiv preprint and treated in time, exposed individuals then became the major source of infection after January 23, 2020.
We found that the estimated ܴ value for COVID-19 in Wuhan was significantly higher than those reported for SARS and MERS. Since the estimated values are mostly between 2 and 3 for SARS 15 The number of cases in Wuhan in epidemic stages 1 and 2 might be substantially underreported due to various reasons. To address this problem, we designed a method to estimate the epidemic scale in the first two stages. Our numerical results demonstrate a large degree of underreporting with a similar conclusion to a previous study 6 and these exposed individuals likely became a major source of intra-or inter-provincial infection. Underreporting of exposed individuals could lead to an underestimation of infectious individuals in stages 1 and 2. Considering the rapidly increasing number of infectious individuals in Wuhan after January 23, 2020, our . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.27.20045757 doi: medRxiv preprint estimation of the initial exposed number based on the spatio-temporal piecewise structure is necessary and helpful for understanding the true early situations.
There are several limitations for this study. Firstly, individuals with no or only mild symptoms might not seek treatment, and therefore, not be included in the dataset, especially for epidemic stages 1 and 2. This reporting bias could result in underestimation for the number of cases as well as ܴ . Secondly, we did not include epidemic data from Hong Kong, Macau, Taiwan, and foreign countries. Spatial and temporal heterogeneity would have been larger if these data were included. Finally, we used data from laboratory diagnosed cases, and therefore, the number of predicted cases after February 12 would be lower than the officially reported number of both clinically and laboratory diagnosed cases, when the revised reporting rule was implemented; unfortunately, it is not possible to differentiate the numbers of clinically-and laboratory-diagnosed cases. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 
