Databases of ICMJE-accepted clinical trial registry platform were searched on February 14, 2020.
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and non-RCTs of COVID-19 were considered. Conditions of patients include common type, severe type or critical type. Interventions include traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) and Western medicine. We excluded trials that for discharged patients, psychological intervention and complications of COVID-19.
The general information and outcomes, outcome measurement instruments and measurement times were extracted. The results were analysed by descriptive analysis.
19 registry platforms were searched. A total of 97 protocols were included from 160 protocols. For protocols of TCM clinical trials, 76 outcomes from 16 outcome domains were reported, and almost half (34/76, 44.74%) of outcomes were reported only once; the most frequently reported outcome was time of SARS-CoV-2 RNA turns to negative. 27 (27/76, 35.53%) outcomes were provided one or more outcome measurement instruments. 10 outcomes were provided one or more measurement time frame. For protocols of western medicine clinical trials, 126 outcomes from 17 outcome domains were reported; almost half (62/126, 49.21%) of outcomes were reported only once; the most frequently reported outcome was proportion of patients with negative SARS-CoV-2. 27 outcomes were provided one or more outcome measurement instruments. 40 (40/126, 31.75%) outcomes were provided one or more measurement time frame.
Outcome reporting in protocols of clinical trials of COVID-19 is inconsistent. Thus, developing a core outcome set is necessary.
1. This review is the first to describe variation in outcomes, outcome measurement instruments and outcome measurement time reporting in clinical trials for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
2. All the database of ICMJE-accepted clinical trial registry platform were searched, and randomized controlled trials and observational studies were considered.
4. The aim of this review was to provide a list of outcomes for clinical trials of COVID-19, both interventions of Traditional Chinese Medicine and western medicine were considered. 5. When the searching was conducted, no clinical trials were registered by countries out of China, so all of included protocols were from China.
shown in Figure 1 . Figure   6 .
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the .
In the 17 outcome domains of protocols of western medicine clinical trials, 5 outcome domains (adverse events/effects, delivery of care, economic, metabolism and nutrition outcomes, mortality/survival) consisted of only one outcome. These outcomes are reported between 1 and 36 times, and the median outcome reporting time is 1. Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal outcomes included the largest number of outcomes, which includes 31 outcomes; chest imaging is reported more frequently than other outcomes. The number of outcomes in different outcome domains in protocols of western medicine clinical trials is shown in Figure 7 .
This review is the first to evaluate the outcome reporting of protocols of TCM and western medicine clinical trials for treating COVID-19. The results showed variations in the outcome reporting. For outcome measurement instruments/outcome definitions and outcome measurement time, there is also heterogeneity. However, many primary investigators did not provide outcome measurement instruments/outcome definitions or outcome measurement time. It is difficult to predict results of clinical trials now. But it is obvious that these problems may result in the exclusion of some studies from systematic reviews/meta-analyses due to the heterogeneity of outcomes or outcome measurements. It is a waste.
In this review, we find that there are more than 40 duplicated outcomes between protocols of TCM and western medicine clinical trials. No matter for clinical trials of TCM or western medicine, etiological test, chest imaging, respiratory symptoms, temperature, mortality/survival and adverse events are very important. These outcomes are relevant to the prognosis of disease and safety of therapy.
Because of no specific therapy can be used in the treatment of COVID-19, it is necessary and urgent to conduct clinical trials, no matter what the interventions are. We believe that it is important to develop a COS for clinical trials of TCM and western medicine for treating COVID-19, so that the efficacy of different interventions can be compared and merged in systematic review/meta-analysis. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.20031401 doi: medRxiv preprint author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 63. Wu C. Nasal high-fow preoxygenation assisted fibre-optic bronchoscope intubation in patients with critical All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.20031401 doi: medRxiv preprint author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.20031401 doi: medRxiv preprint
