Transmission between hosts is a critical part of the viral lifecycle. Recent studies of viral transmission have 9 used genome sequence data to evaluate the number of particles transmitted between hosts, and the role 10 of selection as it operates during the transmission process. However, the interpretation of sequence data 11 describing transmission events is a challenging task. We here present a novel and comprehensive frame-12 work for using short-read sequence data to understand viral transmission events. Our model describes 13 transmission as an event involving whole viruses, rather than independent alleles. We demonstrate how 14 selection and noisy sequence data may each affect inferences of the population bottleneck, and identify 15 circumstances in which selection for increased viral transmission may or may not be identified. Applying 16 our model to data from a previous experimental transmission study, we show that our approach grants a 17 more quantitative insight into viral transmission, inferring that between 2 to 6 viruses initiated infection, 18 and allowing for a more informed interpretation of transmission events. While our model is here applied 19 to influenza transmission, the framework we present is highly generalisable to other systems. Our work 20 provides new opportunities for studying viral transmission.
21
Introduction
Understanding viral transmission is a key task for viral epidemiology. The extent to which a virus is able 23 to transmit between hosts determines whether it is likely to cause sporadic, local outbreaks, or spread 24 to cause a global pandemic [1, 2]. In a transmission event, the transmission bottleneck, which specifies 25 the number of viral particles founding a new infection, influences the amount of genetic diversity that is 26 retained upon transmission, with important consequences for the evolutionary dynamics of the virus [3,4].
Recent studies have used genome sequencing approaches to study transmission bottlenecks in influenza 29 populations. In small animal studies, the use of neutral genetic markers has shown that the transmission 30 bottleneck is dependent upon the route of transmission, whether by contact or aerosol transmission [5,6]. 31 In natural human influenza populations, where modification of the virus is not possible, population genetic 32 methods have been used to analyse bottleneck sizes. Analyses of transmission have employed different 33 approaches, exploiting the observation or non-observation of variant alleles [7] or using changes in allele 34 frequencies to characterise the bottleneck under a model of genetic drift [8-11]. A recent publication 35 improved this latter model, incorporating the uncertainty imposed upon allele frequencies by the process 36 of within-host growth [12]. Two studies of within-household influenza transmission have provided strik-37 ingly different outcomes in the number of viruses involved in transmission, with estimates of 1-2 [13] and 38 100-200 [14] respectively.
39 40 Another focus of research has been the role of selection during a transmission event; this is important 41 in the context of the potential for new influenza strains to become transmissible between mammalian 42 hosts [15, 16]. Studies examining transmissibility have assessed the potential for different strains of in-43 fluenza to achieve droplet transmission between ferrets under laboratory conditions [17-20]; ferrets provide 44 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license is made available under a
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/302331 doi: bioRxiv preprint a useful, if imperfect, model for transmission between humans [21, 22]. The application of bioinformatic 45 techniques to data from these experiments has identified 'selective bottlenecks' in the experimental evolu-46 tion of these viruses [23, 24], whereby some genetic variants appear to be more transmissible than others.
In these studies, selection has been considered in terms of the population diversity statistic π; changes 48 in π N /π S , the ratio between non-synonymous and synonymous diversity, have been used to evaluate 49 patterns of selection across different viral segments. 50 51 We here note the need for a greater clarity of thinking in the analysis of viral transmission events. For 52 example, analysis of genetic variants in viral populations shows that synonymous and non-synonymous 53 mutations both have fitness consequences for viruses [25, 26]; the use of synonymous variants as a neu-54 tral reference set may not hold. More fundamentally, in an event where the effective population size is 55 small, the influences of selection and genetic drift may be of similar magnitude [27]. However selection 56 is assessed, this implies a need to separate stochastic changes in a population from selection, especially 57 where a transmission bottleneck may include only a small number of viruses [5, 13, 28]. The attribution 58 of a change in diversity to the action of selection or the attribution of changes in allele frequencies to 59 genetic drift could both potentially be flawed. Given the increasing availability of sequence data, more 60 sophisticated tools for the analysis of viral transmission are required. 61 62 Here we note three challenges in the analysis of data from viral transmission events. Firstly, selection 63 can produce changes in a population equivalent to those arising through a neutral population bottle-64 neck [29] (Figure 1A), making it necessary to distinguish between the two scenarios. A broad literature 65 has considered the simultaneous inference of the magnitude of selection acting upon a variant along with 66 an effective population size [30-35]. However, such approaches rely on the observation of an allele fre-67 quency at more than two time points so as to distinguish a deterministic model of selection (with an 68 implied infinite effective population size) from a combined model of selection with genetic drift; such 69 approaches cannot be directly applied to the analysis of viral transmission.
70 71 Secondly, inferences of transmission events need to account for the haplotype structure of viral pop-72 ulations, whereby whole viruses, rather than sets of independent alleles, are transmitted (Figure 1B). 73 The low rate of homologous recombination in segments of the influenza virus [36, 37] implies that viral 74 evolution proceeds at the haplotype level [38]; competition occurs between collections of linked alleles, or 75 segments, rather than the individual alleles themselves. Under such circumstances, fitter variants do not 76 always increase in frequency within a population [39-41]. Calculations of genetic drift, which are often 77 derived from the evolution of independent variants [42], need to be adjusted to account for this more 78 complex dynamics. 79 80 Thirdly, noise in the measurement of a population may influence the inferred size of a transmission 81 bottleneck (Figure 1C). A broad range of studies have examined the effect of noise in variant calling 82 and genome sequence analysis [43-50]; more recently formulae have been proposed to measure the preci-83 sion with which allele frequencies can be defined given samples from a population [51-53]. Where small 84 changes in allele frequencies are used to assess a population bottleneck, it is important to separate the 85 effects of noise in the measurement of populations from genuine changes in a population.
86 87
We here describe a novel method for the inference of population bottlenecks which resolves the above 88 issues. Our approach correctly evaluates changes in a population even where the data describing that 89 change is affected by noise. It explicitly accounts for the haplotype structure of a population, utilising the 90 data present within short sequence reads. Further, where these factors can be discriminated, our method 91 distinguishes between the influences on the population of selection and the transmission bottleneck. 92 Studies of viral evolution have highlighted the potential for payoffs between within-host viral growth and 93 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license is made available under a
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/302331 doi: bioRxiv preprint transmissibility [54]; given sufficient data we can evaluate how selection operates upon each of these two 94 phenotypes. Our model extends previous population genetic work on bottleneck inference to provide a 95 generalised model for the analysis of data spanning viral transmission events. 96 Results 97 Model outline 98
In the recent literature, the term 'bottleneck' has been applied to describe a reduction in the genetic 99 diversity of a population (e.g.
[55]), whether arising from selection or a numerical reduction in the size of 100 a population. Here, we define a 'bottleneck' more strictly as a neutral process whereby a finite number 101 of viral particles from one population found a subsequent generation of the population, either within the 102 same host, or across a transmission event from host to recipient. Selection then constitutes a modification 103 to this process whereby some viruses, because of their genotype, have a higher or lower probability of 104 making it through the bottleneck to found the next generation.
We applied a population genetic method to make a joint inference of the bottleneck size and the 107 extent of selection acting during a transmission event. We consider a scenario in which a viral population 108 is transmitted from one host to another, with samples being collected before and after the transmission 109 event (Figure 2A ). In our model viruses are categorised as haplotypes, that is, according to the variants 110 they contain at a subset of positions in their genome. As such, the viral population is represented as 111 a vector of haplotype frequencies; the population before transmission is represented by the vector q B . 112 During transmission, a random sample of N T viruses are passed on to the second host to give the founder 113 population q F . Selection for transmissibility, whereby genetic variants cause some viruses to be more 114 transmissible than others, is described by the function S T . The potentially small size of the founder pop-115 ulation means that the population evolves within the host under the influence of genetic drift to create 116 the large post-transmission population q A ; this process is approximated in our model by a population 117 bottleneck of effective size N G . Selection acting for within-host growth may further alter the genetic 118 composition of the population; this effect is described by the function S G . Our method thus allows for a 119 discrimination to be made between selection for increased within-host replication and for increased viral 120 transmissibility. Observations of the population are collected before and after transmission via a noisy 121 sequencing process to give the datasets x A and x B . The extent of noise in the sampling and sequencing is 122 characterised by the parameter C; a value of C = 0 would indicate that samples contain no information, 123 while a large C corresponds to noiseless sampling, as in a binomial model. 124 125
To summarise our approach, we note that both the transmission and within-host growth events can 126 be represented as sampling processes, which may each be biased by the effect of selection. As such, given 127 an estimate of the noise inherent to the sequencing process, and externally-derived estimates for N G and 128 S G , we can calculate an approximate likelihood for the parameters N T and S T given the observations 129 x B and x A . Maximising this likelihood gives an estimate for the size of the transmission bottleneck 130 and the extent to which specific genetic variants within the pre-transmission population confer increased 131 transmissibility upon viruses.
132 133
In our model we discriminate between changes in a population arising from selection and those aris-134 ing due to the population bottleneck. This is achieved by considering regions of the genome between 135 which recombination or reassortment has removed linkage disequilibrium between alleles ( Figure 2B ). As 136 transmission involves whole viruses, the bottleneck N T is preserved between regions. Meanwhile, in the 137 absence of epistasis, selection acting upon one region of the virus does not influence the composition of the 138 population in other parts of the genome. As such, a cross-region calculation estimates both N T and the 139 . doi: bioRxiv preprint 157
involving the absolute number of reads of a genome position, which specifies the depth of noise-free reads 158 that would produce the same degree of certainty in an allele frequency. This statistic is dominated by the 159 smaller of C and the absolute read depth; for large C this statistic is close to the absolute read depth, 160 while as the number of reads describing a variant frequency becomes large, the effective depth tends to 161 C + 1.
Inferences of bottleneck sizes showed a limit on the inferred bottleneck size governed by noise in se-
Straightforward statistics describing a population may generate misleading inferences of population bottleneck size. In the illustrated case, the genetic structure of a population is changed by a population bottleneck during transmission, but the frequency of each allele within the population does not change; an inference of bottleneck size derived from single-locus statistics would incorrectly be very large. C. Noise arising from the process of collecting and sequencing data is likely to produce differences between the observed populations, even in the event that the composition of the viral population was entirely unchanged during transmission.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. Here we used simulated data to evaluate the performance of our model under different circumstances. is likely to result from noise. Here we note failures in the inferred bottleneck size even with very high 170 C; these occur due to the finite read depth in our simulations, which averaged around 12,000. In these 171 calculations a neutral method, in which selection was assumed to have no effect on the population, was 172 used to make inferences from neutral simulations. A consistent value of C was used for simulation and 173 inference purposes.
In a real dataset, the extent of noise may be unknown. Further investigation showed bottleneck 176 estimation to be relatively robust to an incorrect estimate of the extent of noise in a dataset, except 177 where the extent of noise was substantially overestimated (Supplementary Figure S1) In contrast to measures of diversity, which attempt to associate selection with a gene or segment of a virus, 226 our method was able to correctly identify specific variants conferring increased transmissibility. Success 227 was more often achieved in cases for which selection was relatively strong and the transmission bottleneck in one direction or another by more than the expectation; this leads to false inferences of selection.
Genuine changes resulting from selection become easier to identify when the changes are themselves 242 larger (stronger selection) or where the magnitude of the stochastic effect is reduced (higher N T ). In The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/302331 doi: bioRxiv preprint . True positives were defined as inferences for which selection was inferred for the selected locus in a system; false positives were defined as inferences for which selection was inferred at any neutral locus or for multiple neutral loci in the system. Supplementary Table S1 . We have here presented an approach for jointly inferring a population bottleneck size and selection for dif-307 ferential transmissibility from viral sequence data describing a transmission event. While basic sampling 308 approaches to bottleneck inference have been improved by an accounting for drift during within-host viral 309 growth [7, 12-14], our approach additionally accounts for noise in genome sequence data, exploits partial 310 haplotype data available from short-read sequencing, and separates the influence of a finite bottleneck 311 from that induced by selection for increased transmissibility. In multiple studies, the transmission bot-312 tleneck has been found to be narrow during natural viral spread between hosts [59]. While we do not 313 explicitly question these results, we note that both selection and noise in the measurement of sequence 314 data can decrease the inferred bottleneck where sequence data is used for inference. Our approach is The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/302331 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 8 . Inferred fitness landscape for within-host growth using data from the HA190D225D dataset. Viral haplotypes for which the inferred frequency rose above 1% in at least one animal are shown. Lines show haplotypes separated by a single mutation. Figure 9 . Histograms of bottleneck inferences for HA190D225D and Mut transmission pairs from 100 analysis seeds. A replicate inference method was employed for the Mut transmission pairs such that a common fitness landscape was imposed. The Mut transmission pairs may take different bottleneck values and have been plotted as an overlapping histogram. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/302331 doi: bioRxiv preprint
Applied to the analysis of data from a recent evolutionary experiment, our approach provides a 321 greater precision in the inference of evolutionary statistics, leading to an alternative explanation for the 322 data observed. Where data have previously been interpreted as implying differential transmission bottle-323 necks between strains, our approach infers bottlenecks of similar sizes. Furthermore, where evidence has 324 been interpreted to suggest a differing extent of transmissibility between strains, our approach attributes 325 changes in allele frequencies either to stochastic effects or to selection for increased host adaptation. Our 326 result does not definitively prove the absence of differential transmissibility among the viruses involved 327 in this study, but implies that data which might suggest differential transmissibility can be more parsi- to assess viral transmissibility, steps taken to increase the number of particles transmitted would increase 338 the power to infer differential transmissibility. We note that, unlike more general inferences of selection 339 from changes in viral diversity, our approach evaluates selection in terms of specific variants conveying In the light of our study, we propose that the term used in some analyses of viral transmission, of a 345 'selective bottleneck' is ambiguous, failing on the one hand to distinguish changes in a population arising 346 from selection and those occurring through stochastic change in the population, and on the other to 347 distinguish between selection for more rapid within-host selection or for inherent viral transmissibility.
While selection may act differently for these latter two phenotypes [54], their respective influences are 349 intrinsically hard to separate from data. In this case, the completeness of the collected data, covering 350 both within-host adaptation and between-host transmission, was necessary to evaluate the cause of evo-351 lutionary change. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/302331 doi: bioRxiv preprint such information could prove powerful for the study of viral transmission. During the process of growth between q F and q A , the population may be influenced by selection 409 for within-host growth; this acts independently of selection for transmissibility [70], and is described by 410 the function S G (q), which changes the frequencies of haplotypes according to their relative within-host 411 growth rates. Selection for within-host growth is challenging to separate from selection for transmissibil-412 ity; we here estimate this parameter independently from the transmission event itself. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/302331 doi: bioRxiv preprint Likelihood framework 415 As the observations x B and x A are conditionally independent given q B , the joint probability of the 416 system may be written as a product of individual probabilities
where θ represents the remaining variables in the system upon which only x A depends.
As an approximation to this likelihood, we split the inference into two calculations, first calculating 
The first component of this likelihood, corresponding to the initial observation of the system, x B , 427 represents a straightforward sampling of the system, drawing from a collection of viral haplotypes. Such 428 a process can be modelled using a multinomial distribution. However, as is well known [53], next-429 generation sequence data is error-prone, such that less information is contained within the sample than 430 would be contained in a multinomial sample of equivalent depth to the sample. A Dirichlet multinomial 431 distribution may be used to capture this reduction of information, such that
where C, which alters the variance of the distribution, characterises the extent of noise in the data. The 
The fitness of a haplotype h i is then given as
where the sum is calculated over all fitness parameters k. To give an example, a single-locus fitness Selection is incorporated into the transmission event from donor to recipient by representing this event as 466 a biased sampling process. As we are not considering data here, noise is not an issue. We therefore model 467 the population q F as arising via a multinomial sampling process of depth N T from a set of genotypes 468 with frequencies S T (q B ), where S T represents the role of selection in the transmission event. We write The haplotype frequency vector q B is unknown and must be determined from the available data. We :
and
where β = N B +C
, M (q) = Diag(q) − qq † and † indicates the transpose function. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/302331 doi: bioRxiv preprint
and its variance by
arising from a multinomial sample of depth N T and the selectively shifted frequencies S T q B . 
and variance
is defined for notational convenience. 
These expressions characterise the x B component of the likelihood from Eq. 2 in terms of a normal dis-530 tribution. We identify values of µ B and Σ B maximising this likelihood. As the covariance matrix Σ B 531 may contain a large number of elements, we make the approximation that its off-diagonal elements are 532 zero.
Moving on to the post-transmission process, the marginalisation over q B results in a mean of
where in the penultimate step we used the first-order second-moment approximation to a vector function 536 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/302331 doi: bioRxiv preprint acting on a random variable. The law of total variance yields
Note that (DS) j i = ∂Si ∂qj is the Jacobian matrix arising from the first-order second-moment approximation.
Marginalisation over q F yields a mean of
and variance
where in the last step we defined γ = N T +N G −1
Treating the integral over q A in a similar manner, we obtain by the law of total expectation
Analogously, the law of total variance yields 545 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/302331 doi: bioRxiv preprint
The above expressions represent mean and covariance matrices of multivariate normal distributions or more explicitly, 
Data from multiple genes 588
The mathematical framework outlined above utilises the haplotype information inherent to the data, and 589 accounts for the effect of noise in the sequencing process ( Figure 1B,C) . However, in order to discriminate 590 between changes in viral diversity arising from bottlenecking and selection ( Figure 1A ) it is necessary 591 to consider data from different regions of the genome at which genetic diversity is nominally statistially where the subscript m denotes information particular to a specific genomic region. 
where the subscript r denotes information particular to a specific replicate.
Application to data 605 Our method was applied to both simulated sequence data, and data from an evolutionary experiment 606 conducted in ferrets [24] .
Generation of simulated data 608 Simulated data were generated in order to nominally reflect data from an influenza transmission event. . The specific data examined here describes two sets of viral transmissions. In the 637 first, denoted HA190D220D, a viral population was given to three ferrets, transmission to a recipient host 638 being observed in one of three cases, giving time-resolved sequence data from four ferrets. In the second, 639 denoted Mut, a viral population arising from the first experiment was given to three ferrets, transmission 640 to two recipient hosts being observed, giving data from five ferrets.
Processing of sequence data 642 Genome sequence data was processed using the SAMFIRE software package, according to default set- Figure S13B) . Finally, linear and decay exponential models were fitted to this data via 749 regression, selecting the BIC penalty model which minimised the error in the inferred bottlenecks from 750 the simulation data. We note that our penalty is a function of the inferred population bottleneck, higher 751 penalties being inferred for tight bottlenecks and lower penalties being inferred for looser bottlenecks.
Thirdly, the inferred data was reinterpreted to derive a BIC penalty optimal for the inference of The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/302331 doi: bioRxiv preprint Table S1 . Inferred fitness coefficients for the within-host evolution of the virus within each experiment. Parameters were inferred across all index and contact ferrets within each experiment and are reported to a single decimal place. Only polymorphisms at which within-host selection was identified are listed. The parameter χ denotes an epistatic interaction between variant alleles. We note that our method infers the approximate shape of a fitness landscape based upon a reconstruction of whole viral segments; individual selection coefficients may be subject to variance between similar fitness landscapes.
Mut HA190D220D PB2 Figure S2 . Median inferred bottleneck size from data simulating neutral transmission and transmission with a single locus under selection of magnitude σ ∈ {0, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0, 2.0}. Inferences were made using either a neutral model, in which the effect of selection was assumed to be zero, or a selection model, which allowed scenarios involving selection to be identified. Median inferences are shown from 100 simulations, each involving three replicate transmission events, for each datapoint.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/302331 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure S3 . Inferred bottleneck sizes N T for a range of true bottleneck sizes. Results were generated by applying a neutral inference model to selected simulated data. Results are shown for 200 simulations at each bottleneck size.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/302331 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure S4 . Inferred bottleneck sizes N T for a range of true bottleneck sizes. Results were generated by applying an inference model accounting for selection to selected simulated data. Results are shown for 200 simulations at each bottleneck size.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/302331 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure S5 . Inferred bottleneck sizes N T for a range of true bottleneck sizes. Results were generated by applying a neutral inference model to selected simulated data. Results are shown for 200 simulations at each bottleneck size, each simulation describing three replicate transmission events.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/302331 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure S6 . Inferred bottleneck sizes N T for a range of true bottleneck sizes. Results were generated by applying an inference model accounting for selection to selected simulated data. Results are shown for 200 simulations at each bottleneck size, each simulation describing three replicate transmission events.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/302331 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure S10 . Histograms of selection inferences for the Mut transmission pairs from 100 random seeds using an allele frequency cut-off of 2%. A replicate inference method was employed such that a common fitness landscape was imposed. Selection inferences that resulted in at least 10% non-zero inferences are here reported by the nucleotide position of the variant site.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. Figure S11 . Histograms of bottleneck inferences for HA190D225D and Mut transmission pairs from 100 random seeds using allele frequency cut-offs of q cut ∈ {0.03, 0.04}. A replicate inference method was employed for the Mut transmission pairs such that a common fitness landscape was imposed. The Mut transmission pairs may take different bottleneck values and have been plotted as an overlapping histogram.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. Figure S13 . Determining BIC penalty function for bottleneck inference under simulated data. A) The ratio of the median inferred bottleneck to the true bottleneck is plotted against the true bottleneck size. As shown in Figure 3 , as the bottleneck increases, our ability to infer it correctly decreases due to noise. In order to account for this phenomenon, a straight line is fitted to the data aiming to capture the general trend. B) Heat map of the bottleneck-specific statistic plotted against BIC penalty and bottleneck size. The plot was generated for three datasets with selection coefficients s = {0, 1, 2} and a simple statistic based on bottleneck differences was employed. More specifically, the median bottleneck was computed across 200 seeds and the bottleneck-statistic was defined as the absolute value of the difference between the median inferred bottleneck and the true bottleneck multiplied by the baseline determined in A). By considering bottlenecks in the range [5, 100] and BIC penalty values in the range [10, 200], a heat map was produced and linear and decay exponential regression were conducted seeking to minimise the sum of the statistic across the values of N T that were considered.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/302331 doi: bioRxiv preprint
