Western Reserve University School of Medicine, nor has it yet been peer reviewed. We are releasing it early, pre-peer review, to allow for quick dissemination/vetting by the scientific/clinical community given the necessity for rapid conservation of personal protective equipment (PPE) during this dire global situation. We welcome feedback from the community.
Personal protective equipment (PPE) is essential for protecting medical personnel and patients during outbreaks of airborne or droplet borne infectious diseases. In particular, the use of face shields, surgical masks and N95 respirators are recommended for infections that may be transmitted by respiratory droplets or airborne particles. 1 Due to the rapidly emergent nature of the novel Coronavirus Disease (COVID- 19) and stringent requirements of proper PPE protocol, many hospitals are running dangerously low on these protective devices. As a result, both patients and their healthcare providers are at increased risk of contracting and spreading COVID-19.
As previously suggested, one method of preserving our current supply of PPE is through cycles of decontamination and reuse with ultraviolet germicidal irradiation (UVGI). Substantial work has been done evaluating the efficacy of UVGI for decontamination of N95 filtering faceplate respirators (FFRs). [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] Recently, UVGI has also been used to facilitate decontamination and re-use of plastic face shields. 7 Ultraviolet (UV) light is a form of electromagnetic radiation with more energy than visible light, but less energy than x-rays. It can be categorized into UV-A (315-400 nm), UV-B (280-315 nm), and UV-C (100-280 nm). The germicidal effectiveness of UV radiation is in the 180-320 nm range, with a peak at 265 nm. 8 The higher-energy UV-C rays can damage DNA and RNA via cross-linking of thymidine and uracil nucleotides, respectively, thus preventing the replication of microbes such as bacteria and viruses. 9 At these wavelengths, the amount of surface pathogen inactivation is directly proportional to the dose of UV radiation, with dosage being defined as the product of intensity (W/m 2 ) and exposure duration(s). 10, 11 Therefore, UVGI is a relatively simple method of decontamination that causes minimal damage to the respirator and avoids the use of irritating chemicals.
One potential concern with using UVGI decontamination is the possibility that it may cause N95 masks to lose their efficacy due to degradation. Fortunately, multiple studies have addressed this question. 4, 5, 12, 13 Their results are summarized in table 1.
There are two primary types of damage that can happen to an N95 mask: 1) structural damage that affects fit, and 2) damage to the filter. Structural damage can be readily detected by performing regular respirator fit tests. Thus, assuming fit tests are performed regularly, the possibility of damage to the filter is the greater concern because it cannot be detected as easily. The only study to observe either type of damage used a range of very high doses of UVGI. 4 At their lowest dose (120 Jcm −2 ), the only significant damage was that, for one model of mask, one layer of the filter became significantly more susceptible to being punctured by a steel ball (decreased burst strength). At higher doses damage gradually became more significant.
Based on these studies, UV radiation appears to be safe for N95 masks at the levels necessary to achieve where the alternative is not decontaminating or using no PPE), up to 20 Jcm −2 or perhaps even 120 Jcm −2 may be 3/17
. CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.25.20043489 doi: medRxiv preprint safe. Note that repeated donning and doffing of masks also leads to structural damage. 14 It is likely that masks would need to be replaced for this reason well before they experienced enough decontamination cycles to experience a cumulative UV dose of 20 Jcm −2 .
Although there is no current consensus on the amount of UV radiation required to inactivate SARS-CoV-2, the UV dose required to inactivate 90% of single-stranded RNA viruses on gel media is an estimated 1.32 -3.20 in vitro studies are likely needed to identify the dose required for safe decontamination, literature suggests that a dose of at least 1Jcm −2 is required to decontaminate soiled FFR masks prior to re-use. These data are summarized in a recently released CDC report. 16 UVGI and other decontamination methods are also summarized online at https://www.n95decon.org.
Many university-affiliated hospitals and higher academic laboratories have access to biosafety cabinets (BSCs) that are regularly used in research to decontaminate laboratory equipment via UV-C light. Due to current social distancing and quarantine measures, there likely exist a substantial number of BSCs that are not currently in use and therefore may be available to be temporarily repurposed for N95 respirator, or other PPE decontamination. While this paper focuses on BSCs, many other promising approaches to UVGI decontamination are being designed by other groups. 7, 17 Given the urgency of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we sought to determine if BSCs could be temporarily repurposed for UVGI decontamination to preserve a dwindling supply of PPE. To do this, we measured the minimum light intensity output by a standard BSC, as well as the variability of light intensity between and within several BSCs.
From these measurements, we calculate a recommended time of 4.3 hours per side (62 minutes per side if the masks can be elevated to 19 cm from the UV-C source) to irradiate FFRs in a BSC to inactivate potential SARS-CoV-2 virus, or 20 minutes per side to irradiate solid PPE, like face shields.
Two different BSCs were used in this experiment, the LabGard ES NU-540-400 Class II, Type A2 model (NuAire, Plymouth, MN), and the the Labgard ES ENergy Saver Class II, Type A2 model (NuAire, Plymouth, MN). Both
. CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint .
BSCs were equipped with a General Electric Germicidal Lamp model G30T8, which is reported to use 253.7 nm UV-C radiation and provide an average intensity of 100 µW cm −2 to the cabinet floor. We measured UV fluence using a UV meter (to obtain absolute measurements) and measured variance due to mask geometry using an array of three photodiodes (see supplemental materials). Experiments were performed on N95 3M 1860S respirators.
These measurements were conducted by placing a UV fluence meter (General Tools UV512C) at each of nine positions in each BSC (see Fig S1. Measurements were also taken in each of the 9 positions at elevations of 33 cm and 48.3 cm above the BSC floor. The UV meter was left in place until the reported value stabilized, at which point that value was recorded as the quantity of UV radiation reaching that position in the BSC. An array of measurements were also taken using photodiodes to assay heterogeneity within a given position. These data are presented in the supplemental materials).
Our measurements of absolute UV-C radiation across BSC floors, as made with UV meters, show a clear pattern of spatial variation in UV intensity (see Fig. 1 ). Interestingly, many of the measured values substantially exceed the manufacturer's specified fluence (100 µW cm −2 ). In BSC 1, all of the measurements were greater than 100 µW cm −2 .
Because the UV meter cannot be attached to a mask, these measurements do not take into account variation produced by mask geometry. Importantly, the minimum observed value differed substantially between BSCs: 111 µW cm −2 vs. 64 µW cm −2 .
This finding is consistent with the fact that the amount of UV-C light emitted is known to decay as bulbs age, and highlights the importance of either using new bulbs or measuring UV-C output to verify that it is sufficient. Note that annual BSC certification (NSF Standard 49) does not include measuring UV output, although many certification agencies offer it as an optional add-on test.
Given a cylindrical UV source with length roughly on the same order of magnitude as the distances from which in intensity is measured, we expect that time for desired dose will increase at least faster than linearly with respect to distance from UV lamp. 18 To assess the possibility of raising masks within the BSC to reduce decontamination time based this relationship, we also took measurements of UV intensity at 33 cm and 48.3 cm above the BSC floor ( Fig   2) . The total height of the BSC was 67.3 cm.
. CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . Indeed, our UV intensity data with respect to the nearest distance to the UV bulb, stratified by position relative to the length of the UV lamp, reveals a close fit to an inverse square function function. These data suggest that this principle can be used to deliver much higher doses than those achieved on the floor of the BSC by raising the object to be decontaminated. (Fig 3) . 1000 minutes min intensity = recommended time (minutes).
(2) The lowest UV-C intensity anywhere in the BSC in µW cm −2 recommended time Estimated time (in minutes) to decontaminate one side of an FFR Now we must choose a value for intensity. To ensure that all masks in the BSC achieve the target UV radiation dose, we must select the minimum level of UV-C radiation anywhere in the BSC. Based on the UV meter data, the lowest UV-C radiation level we observed across both hoods is 64 µW cm −2 . Plugging these values into equation 2, we find that the minimum time required to decontaminate FFRs in a standard BSC, assuming the variance we measured above, is 4.3 hours per side. As that may be a prohibitively long time to wait, we also consider the possibility of elevating PPE within a BSC to reduce the decontamination time. Based on our measurements in Fig 2, we estimate that raising PPE 48.1 cm off the floor of a 67.3 cm tall BSC with a specified fluence of 100µW should reduce the needed decontamination time to a minimum of 62 minutes per side, given the lowest UV measurement made at that height.
In order to decontaminate face-shields in a BSC, much lower UV doses must be achieved. 2-5 mJ cm −2 of UV radiation is estimated to kill most single-stranded RNA viruses on gel media (similar to the hard plastic face-shield).
To err on the side of caution and ensure that other pathogens were also deactivated, we will base our recommendation for face-shield decontamination on a target dose of 60 mJ cm −2 . Because of the flat, uniform nature of face-shields, we also do not need to account for UV dose variation due to mask geometry. As a result, we can use the following 7/17 . CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint 
Ideally, a new mask or respirator would be used for each individual to minimize the transmission of infectious diseases that are airborne or transmitted via respiratory droplets. However, crises such as the current COVID-19 pandemic can create shortages that necessitate measures to conserve PPE. Among potential methods for decontamination,
. CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.25.20043489 doi: medRxiv preprint previous work has suggested UVGI results in less physical deformation than bleach, microwave irradiatin, and vaporized hydrogen peroxide. 5 Additionally, this and other investigations of UVGI for the purpose of PPE decontamination was motivated by the ubiquity of UV lamp equipped biosafety cabinets, especially at large biomedical research institutions.
Various groups have therefore begun decontaminating respiratory protective equipment themselves using UVGI and "homebrew" setups. For example, enterprising clinicians at the University of Nebraska Medical Center are stringing N95 respirators between two towers of UVGI bulbs placed on either side of a room in order to inactivate potential SARS-CoV-2 viral contaminants on the masks. 17 From our measurements, normalized to the technical specifications of the manufacturer using a typical BSC, we estimate the minimum time to decontaminate FFR is 4.3 hours per side. We estimate the minimum time to decontaminate face-shields is 15.6 minutes per side We invite other scientists to add measurements from their own BSCs to our github repository to allow continued updating of this recommendation. 19 Ideally, clinical sites interested in using this protocol should take measurements using calibrated UV fluence detectors of their specific BSCs prior to implementation of this protocol. If a calibrated UV detector is unavailable, UV test strips could provide an affordable way to ensure an appropriate UV dose is achieved in a given BSC. To calculate a time for an arbitrary BSC model, we recommend using Equation 2. In the future, it may be possible to design a technique that avoids the need to flip masks over and irradiate each side separately. By elevating masks off the surface of the BSC and, if necessary, placing reflective material underneath them, it should be possible to ensure that UV radiation reaches the entire mask surface simultaneously and would reduce the manual labor and time required for this protocol. 13. Remove packages from cabinet and redistribute to original owner.
Despite the measures taken here to ensure adequate decontamination of PPE, following this protocol by no means guarantees complete sterilization or decontamination. This method should be implemented only if PPE must be reused. FFRs contain multiple layers of filtration, and respiratory droplets may penetrate into the inner layers.
Though UV-C light has been shown to transmit into and through FFR materials, the transmittance of light ranges from 23-50% through the outer layer depending on the model of the FFR. 6 Therefore, the ability for UVGI to thoroughly sanitize FFRs may vary based on the ability for UV-C light to penetrate through to the internal filtering medium, which contributes the most filtration ability. Virologic testing to determine the degree of decontamination of the inner mask layers is ongoing.
Previous in vitro studies imply that the shape of the inactivation-curve is modulated by the surface being decontaminated. Generally, studies find a much lower dose needed to inactivate virus on gel or plate-based media compared to FFRs such as the N95 mask. 2, 3 The feasibility of our approach for decontaminating FFRs is therefore limited by the long-time duration (at least 4.3 hours per side) needed to achieve a germicidal UV-C dose on the floor of a BSC.
Variance in received dose due to the shape of the FFRs may also contribute to incomplete decontamination. We considered this possibility using an array of photo-diodes affixed to different positions on each mask throughout our 3 X 3 grid. In the areas of the grid receiving the lowest intensity (the front corners), the median observed proportional variance (max intensity/min intensity) across the masks was 2.17. Scaling our recommendation by this value, 9.4 hours per side would be required to decontaminate each mask. We did not incorporate this into our 10/17 . CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.25.20043489 doi: medRxiv preprint main recommendation due to concerns about the our use of directional sensors to measure received dose (i.e. the measured intensity varied substantially with direction of the sensor in addition to sensor position). We believe that our measurements with a UV fluence meter are more reliable and repeatable. We present the photo-diode measurements here as an important potential limitation and something that hospital systems should consider when calibrating their own BSCs. The full photo-diode data and results can be found in the supplemental materials.
Additionally, without measuring the absolute UV-C levels in a given BSC, it is not possible to be sure that it is outputting the specified amount of radiation. For instance UV-C lamps can produce visible light without a significant loss of intensity while UV intensity has fallen below the germicidal threshold. Ideally, UV-C fluence in each BSC should be measured and verified before using this protocol. Given the scarcity of UV-C fluence meters, however, this may not be possible in all cases. The next best solution is to use the newest UV-C bulbs available. Bulbs should be inspected and cleaned regularly to ensure that debris is not blocking UV radiation. 20, 21 With only three BSCs measured, we cannot fully quantify the amount of variation we expect to see across the set of all BSCs. There almost certainly exist BSCs with locations where the UV radiation received is lower than the lowest value we measured. In the future we hope to collect enough data to perform more robust statistics.
As discussed in the background, UV-C-mediated degradation of polymers within the respirator is another possible concern. Fit and filtration testing of the N95 respirators used in this experiment did not reveal any decline in filtration efficiency following UV-C exposure (Fig S4) . While we do not anticipate such degradation being the limiting factor, we recommend that hospitals employing this approach take additional precautions such as: 1) labeling N95 respirators so that they can be reused by the same individual, 2) marking the number of times the same mask has undergone decontamination, as was recommended by Lowe et al. 17 , and ensuring this number does not exceed 40, and 3) regularly fit-testing respirators. Virologic validation of N95 masks radiated in our BSCs using the protocol presented herein is ongoing, and we will update this document as data become available.
All data used in this paper and code written to analyze it are open source and publicly available. 19 funders in the form of the National Institutes of Health and the American Cancer Society and the Taussig Cancer and Lerner Research Institute.
This was a massive team effort with everyone contributing their specific expertise (Fig 4) : 
We affixed three photodiodes (MTPD4400D-1.4) to a standard N95 respirator (3M) and measured UV fluence from nine positions (across a 3x3 grid) equally spaced on the counter of each BSC (Fig S1) .
Photodiodes were operated in zero-bias photovoltaic mode. While the photodiodes had a wide UV spectral range, we did not utilize filters since the diodes were only used to measure relative irradiance and we expected UVC output to be a stable fraction of total UV output from the bulbs. Figure S2 . Schematic of part of the circuit containing the photodiode. A 1 megaohm resistor was chosen to sufficiently amplify the signal from the photodiode. The resulting voltage (less than 1V) was substantially less than the saturating voltage of approximately 4.8V. Voltage measurements were made with an analog-to-digital converter connected to a Raspberry Pi but could also be read through an oscilloscope.
Since voltage measured (less than 1V) was substantially less than the saturating voltage of approximately 4.8V, we expect to be operating within the linear dynamic range of the photodiodes.
The photodiodes used in measurements were of the same model number and from the same lot and were therefore expected to have the same operating characteristics. Measurements of light intensity from the photodiodes were recorded by a Raspberry Pi at 40ms intervals for a total period of 4 seconds. A circuit board with an LM324N operational amplifier (for signal amplification) and an ADS1015 analog-to-digital converter were used to interface the photodiodes and the Pi (Fig S2. Resulting data were used to generate heatmaps of the values
. CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . Figure S1 . Schematic of our process for measuring light intensity across the base of a BSC with photodiodes. A photodiode was attached to the top (north), middle, and bottom (south) of an N95 mask, and the voltage of light that reached diodes was measured both with the UV light turned off and then on. This measurement was performed within each sector of a 3x3 grid at the base of the BSC workzone as illustrated. from all three photodiodes and the UV meter at each position of the 3x3 grid at the base of the BSCs. Analysis was performed in the R programming language 22 using the ggplot2 23 and dplyr 24 packages (all code and data may be viewed in the github repository 19 ).
The N95 respirators were cut into 70 mm × 70 mm pieces and tested in a circular acrylic air duct with an inner diameter of 50 mm. Ambient aerosols were loaded as the pollutant source. The number concentrations of 0.3 -1 µm particles were measured by an optical particle counter (Aerotrak 9306, TSI Inc., USA). The concentrations were record every 1 min for 2 times upstream the respirator filter and then 2 times downstream. The single-pass filtration
. CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.25.20043489 doi: medRxiv preprint efficiency η, which is a function of particle size diameter, d p , was calculated by:
where C up and C down are the particle number concentrations (pcs/L) at upstream and downstream of the respirator filter, respectively, and each a function of (d p ). The pressure drop across the respirator filter was measured by a differential gauge. The air temperature, relative humidity, and filtration velocity were measured by an airflow/temperature meter at the air duct exhaust.
Using an array of photodiodes attached to a standard N95 mask (see Fig S1) , we assayed the heterogeneity due to mask geometry at different positions along the bottom of the cabinet (Fig S3) . The median proportional variance across each mask was 1.42 between the highest and lowest intensities. If we limit our consideration to the front corners of the array (the areas that receive the lowest irradiance), the median proportional variance across each mask was 2.17 (indicating a higher variance due to mask geometry in these areas). Figure S3 . Relative UV intensity as a function of position across the base of two BSCs. Each of the nine sections per BSC shows the voltage from three photodiodes attached to the surface of an N95 mask (top, middle, and bottom). The three photodiodes were attached to different positions on the mask (Fig S1) to demonstrate UV differences across mask surface. To account for ambient light, voltages recorded with the UV lights off were subtracted from the voltages recorded with the UV lights on.
. CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.25.20043489 doi: medRxiv preprint Figure S4 . UV irradiation at the doses discussed does not adversely affect mask filtration efficiency for particles of size 0.3, 0.5, or 1 micron.
. CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.25.20043489 doi: medRxiv preprint
