Infectious disease interventions like contact precautions and vaccination have proven effective in disease 7 control and elimination. The priority given to interventions can depend strongly on how virulent the pathogen 8 is, and interventions may also depend partly for their success on social processes that respond adaptively 9 to disease dynamics. However, mathematical models of competition between pathogen strains with differing 10 natural history profiles typically assume that human behaviour is fixed. Here, our objective is to model the 11 influence of social behaviour on the competition between pathogen strains with differing virulence. We couple 12 a compartmental Susceptible-Infectious-Recovered model for a resident pathogen strain and a mutant strain 13 with higher virulence, with a differential equation of a population where individuals learn to adopt protective 14 behaviour from others according to the prevalence of infection of the two strains and the perceived severity of 15 the respective strains in the population. We perform invasion analysis, time series analysis and phase plane 16 analysis to show that perceived severities of pathogen strains and the efficacy of infection control against 17 them can greatly impact the invasion of more virulent strain. We demonstrate that adaptive social behaviour 18 enables invasion of the mutant strain under plausible epidemiological scenarios, even when the mutant strain 19 has a lower basic reproductive number than the resident strain. Surprisingly, in some situations, increasing 20 the perceived severity of the resident strain can facilitate invasion of the more virulent mutant strain. Our 21 results demonstrate that for certain applications, it may be necessary to include adaptive social behaviour 22 in models of the emergence of virulent pathogens, so that the models can better assist public health efforts 23 to control infectious diseases. 24 1 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/293936 doi: bioRxiv preprint 25 Modern approaches to developing a theory of the spread of infectious diseases can be traced to 1927 when 26 Kermack and McKendrick developed an integro-differential equation model now widely described as the SIR 27 (Susceptible-Infected-Recovered) model [1]. The model tracks changes in the number of individuals suscep-28 tible to an infection S(t), the number of infected individuals I(t), and (implicitly) the number of recovered 29 individuals R(t). Compartmental models such as the SIR model are useful for mechanistic modelling of 30 infection transmission in populations. They have since been further developed to study the evolution and 31 epidemiology of multiple species of pathogens in a population or different strains of the same species [2].
Some models focus on between-host competition while some others on within-host competition [3] . Bull 33 suggested in the 1990s that coupling inter-host and intra-host dynamics in models may be desirable [4] .
Models linking between-host transmission dynamics to within-host pathogen growth and immune response 35 are now becoming commonplace [3, 5, 6, 7, 8]. One such approach is to link host viral load (which is a 36 necessary condition of virulence) to the between-host transmission rate.
Compartmental models have also been used to study the phenomenon of pathogen virulence-the rate 38 at which a pathogen induces host mortality and/or reduces host fecundity [9, 10, 11, 12]. It was initially 39 believed that hosts and parasites co-evolved to a state of commensalism (whereby parasites benefit from 40 their host without harming them) [13, 14] but this hypothesis was later challenged [15]. In mathematical 41 models, virulence is often treated as a fixed model parameter expressing the excess mortality rate caused 42 by the pathogen. For instance, virulence has been assumed to depend on the intrinsic reproductive rate 43 of the parasite [16]. Other research expresses the transmission rate β and the recovery rate µ in terms 44 of a parameter ν that represents virulence [17]. When the impact of human behaviour is discussed in 45 such models, it is discussed in terms of hypothesized effects of human behaviour on the value of the fixed 46 parameter representing virulence. A Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) virulence model by Massad et 47 al [18] shows that reducing the number of sexual partners could possibly drive HIV to be a more benign 48 pathogen. However, the model assumes that the number of sexual partners can simply be moved up or down 49 as a model parameter, whereas in reality the number of sexual partners in a population is the outcome of 50 a dynamic socio-epidemiological process that merits its own mechanistic modelling, and itself responds to 51 pathogen virulence. In general, these models do not treat human behaviour as a dynamic variable that can 52 evolve in response to transmission dynamics and influence the evolution of virulence. (A few exceptions 53 exist, including work that allows virulence to be a function of the number of infected hosts, thus capturing a 54 situation where the magnitude of the epidemics affects the ability of health care services to host patients [19].) 55 However, as human responses to both endemic and emerging infectious diseases show, human behaviour can 56 2 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/293936 doi: bioRxiv preprint have a significant influence on how infections get transmitted. For instance, an early and well-documented 57 example shows how the residents of the village of Eyam, England quarantined themselves to prevent the 58 spread of plague to neighbouring villages [20]. Individuals moved to less populated areas during the Spanish 59 Influenza pandemic in the early 20th century [21]. More recently, masks became widely used during the 60 outbreak of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) at the beginning of the 21st century [22], and 61 it has been shown pathogen virulence in Marek's disease can evolve in response to how vaccines are used 62 [23].
Theoretical models of the interactions between human behaviour and the spread of infectious diseases 64 are increasingly studied [24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30]. For instance, Bagnoli et al [31] found that under 65 certain conditions, a disease can be driven extinct by reducing the fraction of the infected neighbours of an 66 individual. Zanette et al [32] showed that if susceptible individuals decide to break their links with infected 67 agents and reconnect at a later time, then the infection is suppressed. Gross [33] also shows that rewiring of 68 edges in a network (and thus social interaction) can greatly influence the spread of infectious diseases. Of 69 the compartmental models, we focus on those that have used concepts from evolutionary game theory such 70 as imitation dynamics [34] to describe the evolution of behaviour and its interplay with the epidemics. An 71 example of imitation dynamics concerns, as described in detail in [35], the effect of vaccination on the spread 72 of infectious diseases. Each individual in the population picks one strategy and adopts it: "to vaccinate" or 73 "not to vaccinate". The proportion of vaccinators is modelled using an ordinary differential equation and 74 is coupled with a standard SIR model. An important aspect of behavioural models is to couple them with 75 epidemiological processes such as transmission. This coupling creates a feedback loop between behaviour 76 and spread of the disease.
77
Given that adaptive social behaviour is important in many aspects of infection transmission, we hy-78 pothesize that adaptive social behaviour can also influence selection between pathogen strains with differing 79 virulence in ways that cannot be captured by assuming it to be represented by a fixed parameter. Our 80 objective in this paper was to explore how behaviour and virulence influence one another, in a coupled 81 behaviour-disease differential equation model. The model allows individuals who perceive an increase in 82 the prevalence of infection to increase their usage of practices that reduce transmission rates (such as social 83 distancing and hand-washing) and thereby boost population-level immunity. This approach can help us 84 understand the effects specific social dimensions, such as level of concern for a strain or the rate of social 85 learning, on the coupled dynamics of pathogen strain emergence and human behaviour in a situation where 86 virulence imposes evolutionary trade-offs and is strain-specific. Instead of considering long-term evolutionary 87 processes with repeated rounds of mutation and selection, we focus on the case of invasion of a single mutant 88 strain with a large phenotypical difference compared to the resident strain. In the next section, we describe 89 3 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/293936 doi: bioRxiv preprint 101 due to infection (virulence); µ is a birth rate and δ is the background death rate. All variables represent 102 the number of individuals with the given infection status (for instance, S is the number of susceptible 103 individuals). Since R does not appear in the other equations, we can omit R from the analysis.
The system of differential equations in the presence of adaptive human behaviour couples the SI 1 I 2 R 105 epidemic spread with a differential equation for human behaviour ("coupled model"). Each individual in the 106 population can choose to accept or reject behaviours that reduce infection risk (e.g. washing hands, wearing 107 a mask, social distancing), and individuals imitate successful strategies observed in others. Let x represent 108 the proportion of individuals accepting preventive behaviour (we will call these "protectors"). Individuals 109 sample others in the population at rate κ, representing social learning. The choice is based on the perceived 110 severity ω 1 (resp. ω 2 ) from the resident (resp. mutant) strain, where ω 1 (resp. ω 2 ) can be quantified as the 111 probability that an infection by the resident (resp. mutant) strain results in a severe case of disease. The 112 more severe cases the population observes, the more attractive preventive behaviour becomes: we assume
a model without adaptive social behaviour as well as a model that includes it, and in the following Results 90 section we will compare their dynamics. 91 3 Model 92 We compare dynamics of a two-strain compartmental epidemic model in the presence and absence of adaptive 93 social behaviour. Individuals are born susceptible (S). They may be infected either by a resident strain (I 1 ) 94 or a mutant strain (I 2 ). For simplicity, we assume that co-infection and super-infection are not possible. 95 Infected individuals can either recover (R) or die from infection. We furthermore assume that recovery from 96 either strain offers permanent immunity to both strains. The system of differential equations representing 97 the SI 1 I 2 R model in the absence of adaptive social behaviour (we will refer to this as the "uncoupled model" 98 throughout) is given by
where β 1 (β 2 ) represents the transmission rate of the resident (mutant) strain; γ 1 (γ 2 ) represents the recovery 100 rate from the resident (mutant) strain; ν 1 (ν 2 ) represents the death rate from the resident (mutant) strain that individuals respond to the total number of severe cases ω 1 I 1 + ω 2 I 2 they observe at a given time.
Preventive behaviour is not always completely effective. We introduce efficacy of infection control 1 ( 2 ) 115 against the resident (mutant) strain. The efficacy of infection control influences the transmission process. 116 The more effective infection control is against a strain, the less likely it will be transmitted.
More formally, the preceding imitation dynamic (or equivalently, replicator dynamic) assumes that each 118 individual samples others as a fixed rate, and if another person is found to be playing a different strategy 119 but is receiving a higher payoff, the individual switches to their strategy with a probability proportional 120 to the expected gain in payoff [36] . These assumptions give rise to a differential equation of the form 121 dx/dt = kx(1 − x)∆U where k is the sampling rate and ∆U is the payoff difference between the two 122 strategies. This equation is derived elsewhere and is used in other socio-ecological and socio-epidemiological 123 models [35, 37, 38, 39 ]. The augmented system of differential equations representing the coupled social-124 epidemiological SI 1 I 2 RX model with adaptive human behaviour is therefore given by:
(2)
We apply the restrictions i ∈ [0, 1] and ω i ≥ 0.
Baseline parameter values are summarized in Table 1 
R 0,1 (resp. R 0,2 ) is the basic reproductive number of the resident (mutant) strain, where R 0,i is given by
The other two equilibria are endemic. Assuming that basic reproductive numbers are not equal, strains can 145 not co-exist and the strain with the higher basic reproductive number always invades. The analytical expression and stability criteria for the equilibrium with co-existing strains are difficult to 151 compute and therefore, we analyze it numerically.
If both basic reproductive numbers are less than 1, then the system is disease-free and social behaviour is not relevant. Assume, on the other hand, that 1 < R 0,2 < R 0,1 (as in our baseline parameter values, Table   1 , and where the expressions for R 0,1 and R 0,2 are the same as in the SI 1 I 2 R model and assume x = 0.
This corresponds to a scenario where the resident strain is more transmissible than the mutant strain. As already noted the mutant strain can not invade in the absence of adaptive social behaviour (SI 1 I 2 R model).
However, in the presence of adaptive social behaviour, we can derive necessary and sufficient conditions for 6 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/293936 doi: bioRxiv preprint the mutant strain to invade when 1 < R 0,2 < R 0,1 :
These results show that a high level of perceived severity from the mutant strain is a necessary condition 153 for invasion. However, it has to be coupled with a sufficiently high efficacy of infection control against the 154 resident strain (with 1 > 2 ). A high efficacy of infection control against the resident strain will effectively 155 reduce its transmission and therefore creating a larger pool of susceptible individuals for the mutant strain.
The two conditions must be met simultaneously to provide a necessary and sufficient condition for invasion.
The condition that 1 > 2 could easily be met in a real population if the two strains differ in their model 158 of transmission, and the population has more experience with controlling the resident strain than with the 159 new mutant strain. Moreover, a high value of ω 2 could easily be met in a real population due to spreading 160 panic about a new and more virulent strain that public health does not yet know how to best control. 161 We also consider necessary and sufficient conditions for failure of invasion of the mutant strain:
Invasion fails when perceived severity of the mutant strain is low enough but also that of the resident strain jointly. Together, they create a necessary and sufficient condition for the failure of invasion.
Finally assume that R 0,1 < R 0,2 (this scenario is not discussed at length in this paper). In the absence 167 of social behaviour, the mutant strain is bound to invade. However, we derive necessary and sufficient 168 conditions for the failure of invasion when social behaviour is added to the system:
together they provide necessary and sufficient condition for the mutant strain to fail invasion.
We finally turn our attention to the invasion of the mutant strain when it is more transmissible. The 177 invasion is conditional: necessary and sufficient conditions for the invasion of the mutant strain are:
178
In this scenario, a low perceived severity of the resident strain will allow invasion of the mutant strain 179 provided that the efficacy of infection control against the resident strain is high enough. insight into the types of dynamics exhibited by the model. 194 We first consider a scenario where the mutant strain, on account of its greater virulence, is perceived to 195 be ten times more severe than the resident strain (ω 2 = 10 5 = 10ω 1 ). Moreover, infection control against the .
It is difficult for both strains to co-exist without imposing ω 1 = 10 5 > ω 2 = 10 4 . If the resident strain 216 is perceived to be ten times more severe, then co-existence is achieved via a transient but very long-term 217 pattern of switching between oscillatory regimes before the system finally converges to an equilibrium of 218 co-existence (Fig 1g) . The system switches between a longer-lived regime with relatively small epidemics of rate which in turns leads to rapid changes in x. Figure 1h shows the same dynamics as in Figure 1g but on 226 a shorter timescale. 227 We also allowed the perceived severities to be equally high (ω 1 = ω 2 = 10 4 ) and we have increased the 228 efficacies from their baseline values ( 1 = 0.9 and 2 = 0.6) (Figure 1i ). We observe that the mutant strain 229 fails to invade and the prevalence of the resident strain remains relatively close to the initial condition.
In order to refine our understanding of the influence of social parameters on the invasion of the mutant 231 strain, we proceed in the next subsection with phase plane analysis that studies the interplay between the 232 parameters determining regions of invasion. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/293936 doi: bioRxiv preprint
Surprisingly, there are parameter regimes where increasing the perceived severity of the resident strain (ω 1 ) allows the mutant strain to invade (Figure 2a-c) . This occurs across a nontrivial portion of parameter space 236 despite the fact that R 0,2 < R 0,1 . This regime shift occurs because a sufficiently high perceived severity ( 2 ) can allow the mutant strain to invade (Figure 2e-f) . We note again that, surprisingly, invasion can result 252 in the elimination of the resident strain if the perceived severity of the mutant strain is significantly higher 253 than that of the resident strain (ω 2 >> ω 1 ), but when the opposite applies, coexistence results. We have showed how adaptive social behaviour greatly impacts the evolution of virulence in a coupled 256 behaviour-disease model. If we neglect social behaviour, the basic reproductive numbers of the two strains 257 are sufficient to predict which of the strains will invade a population. However, adding adaptive social 258 behaviour with asymmetric stimulation and effects on either strain to an epidemiological system completely 259 shifts how we view whether a more virulent strain will be selected for. As we have seen, social behaviour 
While the model discussed in this paper serves as a general framework for studying the influence of social 285 behaviour on strain competition and emergence, further research needs to be carried out to understand the 286 interplay between the epidemiological and social parameters. For instance, we did not model virulence evo-287 lution explicitly but rather by assuming two strains have already emerged due to mutation and addressing 288 conditions under which the more virulent mutant strain is more fit. Future research could instead model 289 virulence by defining transmission and recovery rates in terms of a virulence parameter, or by using an 290 adaptive dynamics approach. Future research could also explore different possible relationships between the 291 virulence parameters ν 1,2 and the perceived severity parameters ω 1,2 , or the interaction between social learn-292 ing timescales and pathogen evolutionary timescales. We did not study the influence of the social learning 293 parameter κ in this paper, but previous research on other socio-ecological and socio-epidemiological systems 294 suggests that the social learning rate can destabilize interior equilibria [39, 38] . A model that accounts 295 for multiple rounds of mutation would enable studying how pathogen evolutionary timescales interact with 296 11 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It . https://doi.org/10.1101/293936 doi: bioRxiv preprint social learning dynamics. Finally, we assumed no specific relationship between the perceived severity ω 1,2 and the virulence ν 1,2 although a non-trivial relationship certainly exists, and future research could explore 298 possible assumptions for their formal relationship.
In conclusion, our model shows how social behaviour can influence the virulence of emerging strains 300 under plausible parameter regimes when using standard models for social and infection dynamics. When 301 analyzing emerging and re-emerging pathogens and continually evolving infectious diseases such as influenza, 302 it is worthwhile further considering aspects of social behaviour in efforts to mitigate serious threats. x(t)
x(t)
x(t)
x(t)
x(t)
x(t)
x(t)
x(t)
x(t) The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. w1=10 2 , w2=10 2 w1=10 6 , w2=10 8 w1=10 6 , w2=10 2 Figure 2 : Parameter plane analysis of the SI 1 I 2 RX model. These dynamics are more complex than those exhibited by the SI 1 I 2 R model, which only predicts persistence of strain 1 for equivalent parameter values. The epidemiological parameters are at baseline values ( Table 1 ). The social parameters are varied. (a) and (d) show no invasion of the mutant strain when 1 = 0.2 and 2 = 0.1 in the ω 1 − ω 2 parameter plane (a) and when ω 1 = ω 2 = 10 2 in the 1 − 2 parameter plane (d). (b) and (c) represent similar qualitative results when for large 1 = 0.9 we get invasion of the mutant strain in the black region and co-existence with the resident strain in the red region. The invasion region is bigger when 2 is lower ( 2 = 0.1 in (b) and 2 = 0.6 in (c) ). Finally, in (e) and (f ) we observe qualitatively different results when we vary ω 2 in the 1 − 2 parameter plane. In (e) , 10 8 = ω 2 > ω 1 , we have invasion of the mutant strain. In (f ) , ω 1 = 10 6 > ω 2 , we have co-existence of the strains. The light gray region in the lower-left hand corner of subpanel (b) corresponds to both strains being extinct.
