medRxiv preprint Background: The 2019-nCoV outbreak in Wuhan, China has attracted world-wide attention. As of February 11, 2020, a total of 44730 cases of novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia associated with COVID-19 were confirmed by the National Health Commission of China.
Methods: Three approaches, namely Poisson likelihood-based method (ML), exponential growth rate-based method (EGR) and stochastic Susceptible-Infected-Removed dynamic model-based method (SIR), were implemented to estimate the basic and controlled reproduction numbers.
Results: A total of 71 chains of transmission together with dates of symptoms onset and 67 dates of infections were identified among 5405 confirmed cases outside Hubei as reported by February 2, 2020. Based on this information, we find the serial interval having an average of 4.41 days with a standard deviation of 3.17 days and the infectious period having an average of 10.91 days with a standard deviation of 3.95 days.
The controlled reproduction number is declining. It is lower than one in most regions of China, but is still larger than one in Hubei Province. Sustained efforts are needed to further reduce the ܴ to below one in order to end the current epidemic.
On December 29, 2019, Wuhan, the capital city of Hubei Province in Central China, has reported four cases of pneumonia with unknown etiology. Since then, the outbreak has rapidly worsened over a short span of time and has received considerable global attention. On January 7, 2020, the pathogen of the current outbreak was identified as a novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), and its gene sequence was quickly submitted to WHO (The coronavirus was renamed COVID-19 by WHO on February 12). 1,2 On January 30, WHO announced the listing of this novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia (NCP) as a "public health emergency of international concern". As of February 11, 2020, the National Health Commission (NHC) of China had confirmed a total of 44730 cases of novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia (NCP) associated with the COVID-19 in Mainland China, including 1114 fatalities and 4771 recoveries.
Since January 19, 2020, strict containment measures, including travel restrictions, contact tracing, entry or exit screening, non-hospital isolation, quarantine, awareness campaigns and others, have been implemented by the Wuhan Government and quickly adopted by other cities within China with the aim to minimize virus transmission via human-to-human contact. Similar measures were previously employed in China in 2009 to tackle the outbreak of H1N1 including mandatory quarantine of anyone who has had close contact with confirmed patients.
This article investigates the change in the basic reproduction number ܴ and controlled reproduction number ܴ since the outbreak of COVID-19. We have found that the estimated . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.08.20021253 doi: medRxiv preprint controlled reproduction numbers ܴ in all different regions are significantly smaller compared with the basic reproduction numbers ܴ , but ܴ is still greater than one in Hubei Province.
Data were collected from provincial/municipal health commissions in China as well as through ministry of health in other countries and regions with details of each confirmed case including case ID, region, age, gender, date of symptom onset, date of diagnosis, history of traveling to or residing in Wuhan, and, if any, related remarks such as contact identification, cases and case-related information. In addition, the collected dataset also contains date of infection and chains of transmission of infection which can be inferred from travel or residency history in Wuhan and other relevant information, if available, as follows:
(1) If the individual has not been to Hubei Province recently, but were exposed within a four-day period (i.e., the individual has had contact with a confirmed case of NCP on a certain day), then the corresponding date of infection is inferred as the middle of the exposure period;
(2) If the individual has travelled to Hubei Province but has returned within four days, then the date of infection is inferred as the middle of the travelling period;
(3) If the individual has not been to Hubei Province recently, but in close contact with an imported case from Hubei, then the individual is identified to be infected by this imported case;
(4) If the individual has not been to Hubei Province recently, but in close contact with a local case who was clearly infected before that individual, then this individual is identified to be infected by the corresponding local case.
Note: if the individual has been to Hubei Province, the transmission history would not be recorded despite the existence of contact tracing information.
In this study, serial interval is defined as the time difference between dates of infection of successive cases in a chain of transmission (different textbooks may have different definitions). Infectious period is the duration of which an infected individual can transmit pathogens to a susceptible host. In this study, infectious period is defined as the time difference between date of infection and date of diagnosis as there is strong evidence showing that a diseased individual remains contagious even during the incubation period, and would be immediately isolated upon positive diagnosis hence losing the transmissibility. Both are key quantities that depict an epidemic and are essential to estimate the basic/controlled reproductive number, . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint .
Hence, the corresponding serial intervals were approximated by the differences in dates of symptom onset rather than the actual dates of infection, see Figure 1 . We can see that some serial intervals are negative which is certainly impossible by definition. However, noting that the serial intervals were approximated from the dates of symptoms onset, this suggests that the negative values could be caused by different lengths of incubation period between individuals. Here a simple correction is implemented by resetting the negative values to zeros. This shifts the average of the serial intervals to 4.41 days and the standard deviation to 3.17 days after corrections, see table 1. Note that the serial interval of SARS-nCoV in Hongkong was 8.4 days on average. 3 In addition, a total of 67 cases in the collected data were able to identify the corresponding dates of infection. Figure 2 plots the histogram of infectious period while Table 2 shows the numerical summary. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint .
We found that there were no significant demographical differences between the subset of cases used to estimate serial interval and infectious period and the cases in the full dataset. Therefore, the inference made on serial interval and infectious period based on the corresponding subsets should be able to represent the full dataset.
The reproduction number .
The basic reproduction number can be estimated through a variety of models. 5 In this section, we have compared three most popular estimates of ܴ /ܴ as shown below. 
The reproduction number ܴ can be estimated by maximizing the likelihood function. Note that if the empirical distribution of serial interval is used or ‫ݓ‬ ‫ݏ‬ are given, then
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint 
The maximum likelihood method is used to estimate model parameters where the likelihood is obtained by sequential Monte Carlo method, and parameters are estimated using the Iterated Filtering algorithm (IF2) 9 implemented as mif in the R package pomp 10 with ܵ ሺ 0 ሻ equals the population of the region,
is 10 times the average number of confirmed cases from Day 0 to Day 7 and ߛ ൌ 1 0 . 9 1 obtained from the collected data described ahead.
In this section we have estimated the basic reproduction number ܴ and the controlled reproduction number ܴ . Since January 19, 2020, various containment measures have been strictly implemented, especially after the State Council agreed to include NCP into the Management of the Infectious Diseases Law and the Health and Quarantine Law on January 20. Based on an average10.91-day infectious period estimate from our collected data, we expect a flatter rate of increment starting on January 29. Figure 3 plots the number of daily new cases in a log-scale against date, and, as anticipated, the trend supports our guess. Therefore, the quantities ܴ and ܴ are estimated based on collected data in two separate periods, i.e., from January 21 (the starting date of daily updates of confirmed cases . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.08.20021253 doi: medRxiv preprint nationwide) to January 28, and from January 29 to February 5 (the end date of this study) respectively. Table 3 and Table 4 . Despite the disagreement between different estimation methods, all three methods indicate notable reductions from ܴ to ܴ which suggests an improvement in the current situation. This is possibly due to the effective interventions and prompt actions by the local and central governments to minimize further spreading. We also notice that EGR yields smaller estimates of ܴ compared to other methods. This might be because the number of infected patients does not grow exponentially after such strict containment measures. 
Despite the continuous increase in new confirmed cases on a daily basis, the estimated controlled reproduction numbers ܴ produced by all three methods in all different regions are significantly smaller compared with the basic reproduction numbers ܴ . As discussed in Section 4, the real-time controlled reproduction number may be even lower than the estimated values in Figure 3 . Nonetheless, additional effort is needed to further reduce ܴ below one in Hubei Province.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint .
The dataset used in this study is based on the confirmed cases reported by NHC China. However, during the period of data collection, the official guidelines for diagnosis and treatment were updated four times. The criteria of confirmation have evolved from the original "whole genome sequencing of the respiratory excretion" to "positive viral nucleic acid results by the RT-PCR of the respiratory excretion or viral gene sequence", and, most currently, the inclusion of positive nucleic acid results of the blood sample. In the meanwhile, the confirmation process is simplified by removing the accreditation process by the national expert committee for confirmed cases. The fourth edition granted the accrediting authority to the municipalities. 11 In addition, the medical resources in Hubei Province especially in Wuhan have been enhanced remarkably. All of these changes might result in a temporary surge of confirmed cases and lead to an overestimation of ܴ , especially in Hubei Province. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.08.20021253 doi: medRxiv preprint . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.08.20021253 doi: medRxiv preprint
