The aim of the present study was to assess whether SARS-CoV-2 can be detected in the expressed prostatic secretion (EPS) of patients with corona virus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Methods: 18 cases of COVID-19, and 5 suspected cases, were selected from three medical centers to detect the RNA expression of SARS-CoV-2 in their EPS with RT-PCR.
Results were negative in all EPS samples for SARS-CoV-2 of suspected and confirmed patients.
No SARS-CoV-2 was expressed in EPS of patients with COVID-19.
Since the first outbreak of COVID-19 in Wuhan city, December 2019, about 78,000 people have been infected in China. The causative agent of this disease, now called SARS-CoV-2, can cause acute respiratory distress syndrome, and the risk of death is relatively high 1 . The patients who were asymptomatic infected by SARS-CoV-2, constitute the main source of infection. The main routes of transmission are respiratory droplets and close contact 2 . All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org /10.1101 /10. /2020 In addition to secreta of respiratory tract, the researchers had isolated successfully the virus in the urine 3 , feces 4 and conjunctiva 5 of patients. It suggested that the virus may had multiple transmission routes. Based on the above studies, we propose the hypothesis that prostate may be a target organ of SARS-CoV-2, and that the RNA of virus expresses in the EPS of confirmed and suspected patients alike.
From February 25 to March 13, 2020, 18 confirmed cases and 5 suspected cases of COVID-19 were selected from three medical centers to detect the RNA of virus expression in their EPS ( Table   1 ). The confirmed cases in this study were SARS-CoV-2 positive in throat swabs; the suspected cases, while showing symptoms like fever and cough, were SARS-CoV-2 negative in the throat swabs twice with an interval of at least 24 hours. the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.20044198 doi: medRxiv preprint COVID-19. The prevalence ranks from low to high in these three areas.
The study was approved by the ethics committee of each hospital (NYSZYYEC20200008, KY2020-022, 2020-005), and has been registered in Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (ChiCTR2000030756). The patient consent was obtained.
All the samples were collected by trained medical professionals massaging the prostate through anus according to the published guidelines 6 at the three centers. The EPS swab was saved in the virus sampling kit (Bangshuo, Guangzhou, China) immediately, All the samples were tested for SARS-CoV-2 with the recommended Kit (BGI, Shenzhen, China) from Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), following WHO guidelines for real-time PCR. RT-PCR testing was performed according to the recommended protocol.
SPSS software (version 20.0) was used for statistical analysis.
All 23 EPS samples of suspected and confirmed patients tested negative for the RNA of SARS-CoV-2 regardless by various grouping methods, such as days of illness, infected symptoms of All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.20044198 doi: medRxiv preprint urinary system (frequency, urgency and pain of urination), complication (chronic prostatitis, benign prostatic hyperplasia), or treatment method (antibiotic, antiviral, traditional Chinese medicine). Two cases among 18 confirmed patients. their EPS samples was negative on the day of discharge when their throat swabs turned negative and the clinical symptoms disappeared .
The pathogen that causes the COVID-19 has been identified as a novel enveloped RNA beta corona virus 2 7 . As a phylogenetic similar to SARS-CoV, it has currently been named severe acute respiratory syndrome corona virus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Human beings has no immunity to the virus and is susceptible. The incubation period lasts usually 1 to 14 days. Fever and cough are the dominant symptoms， mostly occur at 3 to 7 days after infection.
Gastrointestinal and urological symptoms are rare. A few patients are accompanied by symptoms such as nasal obstruction, runny nose, sore throat, myalgia and diarrhea. Severe patients often have dyspnea and hypoxemia one week after the onset of the disease, then rapidly progress to acute respiratory distress syndrome, septic shock, metabolic acidosis, coagulation dysfunction and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome 2 . All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.20044198 doi: medRxiv preprint significant higher frequency compared with ACE2-expressing cells in type II alveolar epithelial cells (AT2) in human lung (4.25% vs 1.40%) 8 . These evidences suggested that the human testis was a high-risk organ vulnerable to SARS-CoV-2 infection that may result in spermatogenic failure 11 .
ACE2 receptor is also expressed in human kidney. Recently, Academician Zhong Nanshan's team isolated SARS-CoV-2 from urine samples of a patient with COVID-19. A latest study has showed that ACE2 was not only highly expressed in lung AT2 cells but also in absorptive enterocytes from ileum and colon, has indicated that digestive system was a potential route for SARS-CoV-2 infection 12 . It may be a reason by fecal-oral transmission. It has reported that the result of anus swab of SARS-CoV-2 turned positive again in a few of discharged patients during the follow-up 13 . These patients need to be closely monitored for infectivity.
All above evidences show that the respiratory system, digestive system and urogenital system are all the target organs of SARS-CoV-2 14, 15 . It is inferred that the testis and prostate of patients with COVID-19 are also vulnerable to SARS-CoV-2, so we collect the EPS of confirmed and suspected patients to test.
According to our results, there is no any affirmative evidence of All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.20044198 doi: medRxiv preprint the virus expressed in EPS samples, which might indicate that prostate may be not a target organ of SARS-CoV-2, and the virus will not appear in the EPS regardless of the throat swab results.
However, some limitations should be noted. First, although those samples were collected from three medical centers with different prevalence rates, EPS were tested only in mild and common patients, excluding samples of severe patients. Second, semen samples were not obtained, due to some restrictions like non-private ward environment of mobile cabin hospitals, anxiety during isolation period, so the safety of sexual intercourse still remains to be known. Third, our sample size is relatively small, with only 60 cases. In the next study, large samples and long-term follow-up are needed to assess whether sexual intercourse is a potential route for virus transmission. the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.20044198 doi: medRxiv preprint manuscript. WQ, JC, ZL and J Tian contributed equallyand share co-first authorship.
We declare no competing interests.
With the permission of the corresponding authors, we can provide participant data without names and identifiers, but not the study protocol, statistical analysis plan, or informed consent form.
Data can be provided after the article is published. Once the data can be made public, the research team will provide an email address for communication. The corresponding authors have the right to decide whether to share the data or not based on the research objectives and plan provided.
