A newly identified coronavirus, 2019-nCoV, has been posing significant threats to public health since December 2019. ACE2, the host cell receptor for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS), has recently been demonstrated in mediating 2019-nCoV infection. Interestingly, besides the respiratory system, substantial proportion of SARS and 2019-nCoV patients showed signs of various degrees of liver damage, the mechanism and implication of which have not yet been determined. Here, we performed an unbiased evaluation of cell type specific expression of ACE2 in healthy liver tissues using single cell RNA-seq data of two independent cohorts, and identified specific expression in cholangiocytes. The results indicated that virus might directly bind to ACE2 positive cholangiocytes but not necessarily hepatocytes. This finding suggested the liver abnormalities of SARS and 2019-nCoV patients may not be due to hepatocyte damage, but cholangiocyte dysfunction and other causes such as drug induced and systemic inflammatory response induced liver injury. Our findings indicate that special care of liver dysfunction should be installed in treating 2019-nCoV patients during the hospitalization and shortly after cure. : bioRxiv preprint rise of liver enzymes, implying liver function damage in patients infected with MERS-CoV [9].
An very recent epidemiologic study revealed that 43 out of 99 initial patients infected with 2019-nCoV had various degrees of liver function abnormality, with alanine aminotransferase (ALT) or aspartate aminotransferase (AST) above the normal range, and more important, one
In December 2019, a novel coronavirus, temporally named as 2019-nCoV by the World Health Organization (WHO), was discovered in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China [1] . The novel coronavirus was isolated from the airway epithelial cells of patients with pneumonia that was epidemiologically linked to Huanan seafood market in Wuhan. Within 2 months, 2019-nCoV spreads rapidly from Wuhan to all provinces in China, and more than 20 countries around the globe. As of 20:00 on February 3, 2020, 17,335 cases were confirmed in China, 21,559 were suspected, with an alarming number of 361 fatalities. Unfortunately, the numbers of both infected patients and fatalities are still growing rapidly with no effective drugs clinically approved. 2019-nCoV is closely related to Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV), and was proposed to share the same receptor, angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), with SARS [2] [3] [4] .
The liver, being one of the largest organs of the body in vertebrates, is located between the portal and the systemic circulation. It is constantly exposed to dietary antigens, viruses, and bacterial products with inflammatory potential. The liver damage can be caused by multitudinous factors such as exposure to toxins, excessive alcohol consumption, bile duct prevention obstruction, and viral infections [5] . Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is the main causative viral agent for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in China [6] . A recent study also found acute infection of hepatitis E virus (HEV) causes varying degrees of liver damage [7] . Liver damage was reported in SARS-infected patients [8] . 
MacrovascularEndo.
OtherEndo.
Other Table 1 . Patient information of the in-house cohort.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.03.931766 doi: bioRxiv preprint
