Objective: Health system resilience and resilience of a country include the capacity of health personnel, institutions, and populations to prepare for and effectively respond to crises. This study investigates the knowledge and attitudes of the public concerning Ebola Virus Disease in Trinidad and Tobago.
Design and Methods: A cross sectional study whereby respondents (n = 920) were sampled from public places. Data were collected via interviewer administered questionnaires. Data were analysed using SPSS version 23.
Results: The response rate was 67.6 % (622/920). The main age category of responders was the 20 to 30 year age category (40.5%); responders were mostly female (58.0 %). Regarding knowledge, there were significant differences among occupational categories (F = 2.811, df1 = 6, df2 = 571, p-value = 0.011). Tukey's HSD post hoc test revealed that the mean knowledge scores for professional and sales occupations differed significantly (p-value = 0.003). There was a significant association between being afraid to go for treatment and age (p-value = 0.001).
Significant associations were also found between occupational grouping and education attainment with opinion about the preparedness of private medical facilities, likelihood to shun family members with Ebola, being afraid to go for treatment and preference for traditional medicine (p-value <0.05).
This study highlights opportunities for community engagement to enhance health system resilience during outbreaks which would maximise national and global health security. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
All data collected were analyzed using SPSS version 23. A knowledge scale was constructed using the sum total score of nineteen binary questions concerning respondents' knowledge about EVD. The two-sample independent t-test was used to compare the mean knowledge score between males and females. An ANOVA test was used to determine whether there were differences among categories in the age, occupation and education variables. Tukey's HSD Procedure was carried out to determine which pairs of mean scores across occupational categories differed (adjusted p-value <0.05). In order to determine if there was a relationship between the attitudes toward Ebola and demographic factors (age, gender, occupation and education), Chi-Squared Tests of Independence were carried out. In the cases where at least 20% of the cells had expected counts less than 5, Fisher's Exact Test was used.
The University of the West Indies, St. Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago Ethics Committee granted ethical approval for this study (Reference: CEC063/11/15).
A total of 920 participants were approached to participate of which 622 (67.6%) agreed. There were 42% male and 58% female responders. The ethnic groups of the responders comprised those of East Indian origin (35.9%), African origin (27.2%) and other, including mixed ethnicity (36.9%). The majority of responders reported attaining tertiary education (55.6%) followed by secondary education (41.1%). Table 1 summarises the age breakdown of responders and Table 2 the occupational categories.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. . https://doi.org/10.1101/346999 doi: bioRxiv preprint There were no differences in the knowledge scores between males and females (T=-0.959, df= 608, p-value = 0.338).
There were no significant differences in the knowledge scores among the five age groups (F = 2.186, df1 = 4, df2= 613, p-value = 0.069). However, there were significant differences among the mean knowledge score of the seven occupational categories (F = 2.811, df1 = 6, df2 = 571, p-value = 0.011). It was found that the mean knowledge scores for professional and sales occupations differed significantly (Tukey's HSD All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. . https://doi.org/10.1101/346999 doi: bioRxiv preprint adjusted p-value = 0.003). There were also significant differences among education categories (p value = <0.001). Table 2 summarizes the results. 
Of the 586 participants, 50% believed that an outbreak of the EVD was very likely in TT and the most common reason cited for this was easy travel between countries. Furthermore, 97% thought the citizens of TT were not prepared for an outbreak. In terms of age groups, 355 (60.1%) of the 591 respondents were between the ages of 20 and 40 years and believed the country is not prepared to deal with an outbreak of the EVD. It was found that opinions on the likelihood of an outbreak were not dependent on gender, age, occupation and education (p-values > 0.05).
The top three reasons given for the country being ill-prepared for an outbreak were outdated healthcare facilities, lack of education and awareness, and ignorance and laziness among the public.
The majority of participants thought both private and public health care facilities were not prepared to deal with an outbreak. They reported that an outbreak would result in death and panic.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. . https://doi.org/10.1101/346999 doi: bioRxiv preprint
The majority of responders (62%) would be likely or very likely to shun someone with the disease; while 21% were neutral in response. When asked about a family member with EVD, 24% were neutral, and 35% likely or very likely to shun their family member.
Almost one fifth of responders said they would be afraid to go for treatment; 14% stated they would opt for traditional medicine over a health facility. There was no association between citizens who believed there is a cure for the disease and those who would rather use traditional medicine than go to a medical facility (p-value = 0.307).
Being afraid to go for treatment was significantly associated with age of the respondent (p-value = 0.001).
Occupational category was found to be significantly associated with opinion towards private medical facilities preparedness, likelihood to shun family members, being afraid to go for treatment and preference for traditional medicine (p-value < 0.05).
Education was found to be significantly associated with opinion towards private medical facilities preparedness, likelihood to shun a person with EVD, being afraid to go for treatment and preference for traditional medicine (p value < 0.05).
No association with any aspect of attitude was found with gender (p-values > 0.05). 
Further Chi-Squared Tests were carried out to determine the dependence between having a preparedness plan for an outbreak of EVD and demographic factors. In the cases where at least 20% of the cells had expected counts less than 5, Fisher's Exact Test was used. It was found that preparedness did not depend on demographic factors (p-values > 0.05).
Of the 598 respondents who responded to this question, 499 (83.4%) obtained information from various forms of media. Of the 499 responders, the majority (53.3%) were under 30 years of age. However, it was found that the method by which information was obtained was independent of the individual's age (p-value = 0.673).
The study's response rate of 67% presented some useful findings about the public's knowledge and attitudes towards Ebola.
Females outnumbered males but this was somewhat expected since the data collection took place at shopping areas during the day time when more men than women are likely to be at work. The study revealed some useful findings for improving health and healthcare during an outbreak. For example, the significant difference in knowledge scores noted between professional and sales occupations could direct health education measures towards certain occupational groupings.
There was no association between age group and knowledge scores; in Nigeria, sub optimal knowledge was found among secondary school students despite a case of imported EVD in 2014
There was a significant association between age group and being afraid to seek treatment. Fear of seeking treatment suggests a lack of knowledge. The findings show that education level was also significantly associated with being afraid to seek treatment.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. . https://doi.org/10.1101/346999 doi: bioRxiv preprint
The Government and Public Health practitioners need to change the mindset of the public by providing training and education. When persons are educated and possess the skills to manage a disease which have been rehearsed the fears become less.
Responders obtained their information from various media sources. Media coverage can have a great impact. Governments may therefore use this route for dissemination of clear, accurate information during outbreaks (19) .
The little confidence in the health system for handling an outbreak was attributed to a perception that facilities are outdated along with an indifferent attitude. It is noteworthy that responders also had little confidence in private facilities in addition to the public facilities. It seems the Government of TT needs to act to change this perception and /modify their current strategy to inform and educate the public.
The study shows many potential areas for capacity strengthening not only for EVD but for any disease/event that poses a threat to national and thus global health security. The responders are not totally incorrect in their perception that the country is not prepared for an outbreak, since Trinidad and Tobago has not yet fully met its obligations under the IHR 2005.
To build a resilient health system there is a need for community engagement which can aid containment efforts during an outbreak. In addition to the healthcare workers who need to train and to exercise their preparedness plans, the community needs to be involved in the planning and preparedness. In addition to health system strengthening in terms of surveillance and response capacity to early detect and manage outbreaks, the community needs to be engaged and made aware of the risks for each potential threat and of their roles and responsibilities in securing national health security. This could address the issue of staff not presenting to work since community involvement in planning could positively influence decisions healthcare workers take during an emergency with respect to work and surge capacity. In Nigeria respondents suggested sensitisation of communities for effective prevention and control. A survey in the USA stated the need for honest accurate information, 'even if that information worried people.' The survey report indicated that 'These results suggest the value of proactive communications designed to All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. . https://doi.org/10.1101/346999 doi: bioRxiv preprint inform the lay public's decisions, thoughts, and emotions, and informed by concurrent surveys of their responses and needs' (20).
The study used convenience sampling which could affect the generalizability of the findings. In terms of the response rate, the non-responders were in the minority. The demographic characteristics (age, sex) of the non-responders were consistent with those of respondents and hence we could have some confidence in the findings from the 622 responders.
Ebola virus disease was chosen for this study as this disease was of grave concern at the time of the outbreaks since the disease left the African continent for the first time. To quote Dr Keiji Fukuda, a WHO expert, "what happens in Africa affects your neighborhood, either directly or indirectly…the IHR are founded on that principle...but the world beyond public health remains largely unconvinced of it. To really make strides against diseases like Ebola, we have to convince people that there is no "over there" for infectious pathogens in a globalized world (2) .
We therefore all need to be prepared at all times which means rehearsals and drills in the form of table top exercises and multisectoral simulation exercises. Community support and involvement are key. Sensitisation, communication and training are essential. Unfortunately lessons learned from previous outbreaks are not being used to modify existing services and practices and for each new public health event it seems we are starting from square one. An understanding of the community perceptions about a public health threat is what is needed to be able to develop and target information about the disease and its control (21). This study attempted to achieve this, to aid the Government in its capacity building efforts to increase the country's resilience during a major public health event.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. . https://doi.org/10.1101/346999 doi: bioRxiv preprint
