There is concern about a new coronavirus, the 2019-nCoV, as a global public health threat. In this article, we provide a preliminary evolutionary and molecular epidemiological analysis of this new virus. A phylogenetic tree has been built using the 15 available whole genome sequence of 2019-nCoV and 12 whole genome sequences highly similar sequences available in gene bank (5 from SARS, 2 from MERS and 5 from Bat SARS-like Coronavirus). FUBAR analysis shows that the Nucleocapsid and the Spike Glycoprotein has some sites under positive pressure while homology modelling helped to explain some molecular and structural differences between the viruses. The phylogenetic tree showed that 2019.nCoV significantly clustered with Bat SARS-like Coronavirus sequence isolated in 2015, whereas structural analysis revealed mutation in S and nucleocapsid proteins. From these results, 2019nCoV could be considered a coronavirus distinct from SARS virus, probably transmitted from bats or another host where mutations conferred upon it the ability to infect humans. author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The family Coronaviridae comprises large, single, plus-stranded RNA viruses isolated from several species and previously known to cause common colds and diarrheal illnesses in humans [1] . A previously unknown severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) [4] and manually edited using Bioedit program v7.0.5 [5] .
Maximum likelihood (ML) methods were employed for the analyses because they allow for testing author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.24.915157 doi: bioRxiv preprint different phylogenetic hypotheses by calculating the probability of a given model of evolution generating the observed data and by comparing the probabilities of nested models by the likelihood ratio test. The best-fitting nucleotide substitution model was chosen by JModeltest software [6] . ML tree was reconstructed using Generalised time reversible (GTR) plus Gamma distribution and invariant sites (+G +I) as evolutionary model using MEGA-X. [7] Adaptive Evolution Server (http://www.datamonkey.org/) was used to find eventual sites of positive or negative selection. At this purpose the following tests has been used: fast-unconstrained Bayesian approximation (FUBAR) [8] . These tests allowed to infer the site-specific pervasive selection, the episodic diversifying selection across the region of interest and to identify episodic selection at individual sites [9] . Statistically significant positive or negative selection was based on p value < 0.05 [9] .
Homology models have been built relying on the website SwissModel [10] . Structural templates have been searched and validated using the software available within the SwissModel environment and HHPred [11] . Homology models have been validated using the QMEAN tool [12] . Threedimensional structures have been analyzed and displayed using PyMOL [13] . From the selective pressure and structural analysis, mutations of surface proteins, as the spike protein S, and of nucleocapsid N protein conferring stability to the viral particle have been shown.
The viral spike protein is responsible for virus entry into the cell after by binding to a cell receptor and membrane fusion, two key roles in viral infection and pathogenesis. The N protein is a structural protein involved in virion assembly, playing a pivotal role in virus transcription and assembly efficiency. Mutation of these proteins could determine two important characteristics of the coronavirus isolated during the 2019nCoV epidemic, a higher stability than the bat-like SARS coronavirus and a lower pathogenicity than SARS coronavirus. These features can explain the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.24.915157 doi: bioRxiv preprint 2019-nCoV zoonotic transmission and its initial lower severity than SARS epidemic. These results doesn't exclude that further mutation due to positive selective pressure, lead by the epidemic evolution, could favor an ehancement of pathogenicity and transmission of this novel virus.
Recently, Ji et al. described homologous recombination within the spike glycoprotein of 2019nCoV favoring cross-species transmission and suggested snake as probable virus reservoir for human infection because its Resampling Similarity Codon Usage (RSCU) bias is more similar to Bungarus multicinctus snake compared to other animals and humans [3] . In a previous article has been proven that compositional properties, mutation pressure, natural selection, gene expression and dinucleotides affect the codon usage bias of Bungarus species [14] .
These data along with data from our study, enforcing bat origin of infection, could clarify the transmission dynamic of the 2019-nCoV supporting infection control policy during the ongoing epidemic.
author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.24.915157 doi: bioRxiv preprint author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.24.915157 doi: bioRxiv preprint
