Since December 2019, a novel coronavirus named 2019 coronavirus (2019-nCoV) has emerged in Wuhan of China and spread to several countries worldwide within just one month.
Apart from fever and respiratory complications, acute kidney injury has been observed in some patients with 2019-nCoV. In a short period of time, angiotensin converting enzyme II (ACE2), have been proposed to serve as the receptor for the entry of 2019-nCoV, which is the same for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS). To investigate the possible cause of kidney damage in 2019-nCoV patients, we used both published kidney and bladder cell atlas data and an independent unpublished kidney single cell RNA-Seq data generated in-house to evaluate ACE2 gene expressions in all cell types in healthy kidneys and bladders.
Our results showed the enriched expression of all subtypes of proximal tubule cells of kidney and low but detectable levels of expression in bladder epithelial cells. These results indicated the urinary system is a potential route for 2019-nCoV infection, along with the respiratory system and digestion system. Our findings suggested the kidney abnormalities of SARS and 2019-nCoV patients may be due to proximal tubule cells damage and subsequent systematic inflammatory response induced kidney injury. Beyond that, laboratory tests of viruses and related indicators in urine may be needed in some special patients of 2019-nCoV.
In late December 2019, a cluster of mystery pneumonia cases emerged in Wuhan, a city in the middle south of China. Deep sequencing analysis and etiological investigations then confirmed the pathogen was a type of a newly identified coronavirus which had been labelled as 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV). The rapid spread of 2019-nCoV caused the outbreak of pneumonia in China and also other countries, making it a severe threat to international public health security within a short period of time [1] [2] [3] .
Based on bioinformatics analyses, it has been shown that 2019-nCoV genome is 88% identical with two bat-derived severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)-like coronaviruses (bat-SL-CoVZC45 and bat-SL-CoVZXC21), 79% with SARS-CoV, and 50% with MERS- Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-Seq) has been extensively applied in 2019-nCoV research, due to its capability to profile gene expressions for all cell types in multiple tissues unbiasedly at a high resolution. In addition to well-known alveolar type 2 cells in lung, expression of ACE2 has also been investigated in liver cholangiocytes, esophagus epithelial cells and absorptive enterocytes of ileum and colon by scRNA-Seq [11] [12] [13] . These results demonstrated the potential utility of scRNA-Seq to unmask the potential target cell types of 2019-nCoV. Since the urinary system infection and its potential aftermath could be essential to the patient care during and after the infection, here we used two scRNA-Seq transcriptome data in healthy kidneys and one dataset in heathy bladders to investigate the expression patterns of cell types in the urinary system.
Gene expression matrices of scRNA-Seq data from normal kidneys of three healthy donors were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GSE131685). We reproduced the downstream analysis using the code provided by the author in the original paper.
We obtained the scRNA-Seq data of healthy bladder tissues of three bladder cancer patients from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GSE108097). To be consistent with the kidney datasets, we applied Harmony 14 to integrate samples and performed downstream analysis using Seurat V3. Clustering analysis was done by first reducing the gene expression matrix to the first 20 principal components and then using resolution 0.3 for the graph-based clustering. We annotated the cell types afresh using the canonical markers listed in the supplementary table of the original paper.
Kidney samples were obtained at a single site by wedge and needle biopsy of living donor kidneys after removal from the donor and before implantation in the recipient. Kidney biopsy samples were cleaned with sterile PBS after acquisition.
The fresh kidney tissue was immediately transferred into the GEXSCOPE Tissue Preservation Solution (Singleron Biotechnologies) at 2-8째C. The samples were digested in 2ml GEXSCOPE Tissue Dissociation Solution (Singleron Biotechnologies) at 37째C for 15min in a 15ml centrifuge tube with continuous agitation after washed with Hanks Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS) for three times and cut into approximately 1-2 mm pieces. Subsequently, cell debris and other impurities were filtered by a 40-micron sterile strainer (Corning). The cells were centrifuged at 1000 rpm and 4째C for 5 minutes. Cell pellets were resuspended into 1ml PBS (HyClone). To remove red blood cells, 2 mL GEXSCOPE Red Blood Cell Lysis Buffer (Singleron Biotechnologies) was added to the cell suspension and incubated at 25째C for 10 minutes. The mixture was then centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 5 min and the cell pellet resuspended in PBS. Cells were counted with TC20 automated cell counter (Bio-Rad).
The single cell suspension was proceeded to the single cell library preparation and sequencing, as previously described 15 . To be consistent with the public data used above, we applied a similar downstream analysis workflow 14 . We modified the number of principal components to 20 and used resolution 0.6 to obtain comparable cell type clustering results with the public kidney data. Cell types were annotated based on the canonical markers in the literature 14 16 .
By analyzing the public single-cell transcriptome dataset of normal human kidney cells from three donors 14 , we found ACE2 expression distributed across multiple cell types. Notably, ACE2 was mostly enriched in proximal tubule cells, including both convoluted tubule and straight tubule (Fig 1A-D) . The other nephron subtypes, such as collecting duct and distal tubule as well as immune cells, all showed extremely low gene expressions.
To validate this result, we further analyzed normal kidney samples from 2 healthy donors.
The 4736 cells were classified into 9 cell types, which were highly overlapped with the public data including 7 nephron specific subtypes based on the canonical marker genes (Fig 2A) . The proximal tubule (PT) (CUBN, SLC13A3, SLC22A8) were classified into proximal convoluted tubule and proximal straight tubule based on different marker expression level 14 16 . As observed in the public dataset, we observed upregulated ACE2 expressions in all proximal tubule cells comparing to other cell types ( Figure 2D ). Quantitatively, we found about 5%-15% of both straight and convoluted proximal tubule cells expressing ACE2. Previous immunohistochemistry analysis 17 indicated a complex spatial distribution of ACE2 protein expression, concentrated in the brush border of the proximal tubules.
Based on the public bladder dataset of 12 cell types ( Figure 3A However, previous analysis of SARS patients indicated SARS virus was able to survive in urines on detectable levels 18 19 . The detection of SARS virus in urine implied the possibility of virus releasing from infected bladder epithelial cells, in agreement with our analysis above. However, the detailed mechanism of renal involvements of 2019-nCoV and SARS-nCoV is still unclear.
The etiology of AKI in SARS seems to be multifactorial and still uncertain, which was thought to have a certain correlation with the high expression of ACE2 in the kidney 24 25 . Based on our single-cell analysis in both normal kidneys and bladders, we found both detectable levels of ACE2 in kidney and bladder. Kidney PT cells have higher expression percentages than bladder epithelial cells, which may indicate that kidney is more susceptible to 2019-nCoV infection than bladder. Comparing to the expression levels of ACE2 in the digestion system 11 the lower expression of ACE2 in the renal and urinary system could suggest fewer patients with renal related symptoms, which positively correlates with the observations for SARS patients.
Acute kidney injury, which has been proved to be a predictor of high mortality in SARS patients 20 , may also lead to difficulty of treatment, worsening conditions and even be an The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.08.939892 doi: bioRxiv preprint The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.08.939892 doi: bioRxiv preprint The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.08.939892 doi: bioRxiv preprint
