vicinity of 3, as reported in the literature (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) . In this manuscript, we present a mathematical model taking into account asymptomatic carriers. Our results indicate that an initial value of the effective reproduction number could range from 5.5 to 25.4, with a point estimate of 15.4, assuming mean parameters. The first three weeks of the model exhibit exponential growth, which is in agreement with average case data collected from thirteen countries with universal health care and robust communicable disease surveillance systems; the average rate of growth in the number of reported cases is 23.3% per day during this period.
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a novel human respiratory disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The first cases of COVID-19 disease surfaced during late December 2019 in Wuhan city, the capital of Hubei province in China. Shortly after, the virus quickly spread to several countries (7) . On January 30, 2020 The World Health Organization (WHO) declared the virus as a public health emergency of international scope (8) . Forty one days later, on March 11, 2020 it was officially declared to be a global pandemic (9) .
Asymptomatic transmission of COVID-19 has been documented (10, 11) . The viral loads of asymptomatic carriers are similar to those in symptomatic carriers (12) . A recent study concluded that asymptomatic and symptomatic carriers may have the same level of infectiousness (13) . These findings demand a reassessment of the transmission dynamics of the COVID-19 outbreak that better account for asymptomatic transmission.
The primary aim of this manuscript is to characterize the epidemiological dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 via a compartmentalized model that takes into account asymptomatic sub-populations. The most notable result is that with the most recent data at the time of publication, COVID-19 has a large basic reproduction number R 0 which we estimated to fall between 5.5 and 25.4, with a point estimate of 15.4, assuming mean parameters.
In this section we summarize the main results, and leave mathematical proofs for the supplementary material. Numerical estimates for the basic reproduction number follow.
The formulation of the SEYAR model for the spread of COVID-19 begins with decomposing the total host population (N ) into the following five epidemiological classes: susceptible human (S), exposed human (E), symptomatic human (Y ), asymptomatic human (A), and recovered human (R). The arrows, except the disease-induced death (δ), represent progression from one compartment to the next. Hosts progress through each compartment subject to the rates described below.
Listed below is a SEYAR dynamical system in Equation 1 describing the dynamics of 3 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 18.20037994 doi: medRxiv preprint COVID-19 transmission in a human population.
where, N = S + E + Y + A + R. In a mathematical context, the reproduction number R 0 is a threshold value that characterizes the local asymptotic stability of the underlying dynamical system at a disease-free equilibrium. The reproduction number arising from the dynamical system in Equation 1 is given by
As the disease-induced death rate δ is of negligible size, the reproduction number R 0 featured in Equation 2 above admits the following natural biological interpretation:
R 0 = probability of becoming symptomatic upon infection · symptomatic contact rate · mean symptomatic infectious period + probability of becoming asymptomatic upon infection · asymptomatic contact rate · mean asymptomatic infectious period .
A mathematical proof of the calculation yielding the reproduction number R 0 given by Equation 2 is provided in the supplementary material.
The reproduction number is not a biological constant corresponding to a given pathogen (14) . In reality, the values of R 0 fluctuate with time, and depend on numerous factors.
The reproduction number R 0 provides a way to measure the contagiousness of a disease.
It is utilized by public health authorities to gauge the severity of an outbreak. The design and effective implementation of various intervention strategies are guided by estimates of R 0 . Established outbreaks will fade provided that interventions maintain R 0 < 1.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 18.20037994 doi: medRxiv preprint
During the first stages of an epidemic, calculating R 0 poses significant challenges. Evidence of this difficulty was observed in the 2009 influenza A (H1N1) virus pandemic (15) .
Particularly, the COVID-19 pandemic has a different characterization in each country in which it has spread due to differences in surveillance capabilities of public health systems, socioeconomic factors, and environmental conditions. During the initial growth of an epidemic, Anderson et al. (16) derived the following formula to determine R 0 :
where D is the duration of the infectious period, and t d is the initial doubling time. To find t d , simply solve for t in Y = a 0 ·(1+r) t , where Y = 2a 0 , and r = 23.22% (the rationale for this number is explained below). Thus, t d = ln 2/ ln(1 + r) ≈ 3.32. The calculated value of the basic reproduction number using Equation 3 is R 0 ≈ 5.7, using the mean value of the infectious period reported in Table 1 . This value should be understood as an underestimation of the true R 0 because there is no consideration of asymptomatic carriers with this formulation.
A striking characteristic of COVID-19 is the nearly perfect exponential growth reported during the first three weeks of community transmission. Figure where t is time measured in days, is r = 23.32%, and the average of the initial conditions 5 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 18.20037994 doi: medRxiv preprint is a = 103 cases. Thus, the average growth of the symptomatic compartment (Y ) of COVID-19 during the first three weeks of community transmission in thirteen countries is characterized in average by the equation
where Y d represents the distribution of time series of reported cases, and t is time measured in days. There are well known challenges in attempting to fit an exponential function to epidemiological data (18) (19) (20) . However, given the relatively slow progression of COVID-19, and the protracted infectiousness period, the growth of the symptomatic population can 6 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . be well characterized by an exponential function for up to three weeks.
The parameters with the greatest uncertainty at the moment of writing are λ Y R and λ AR ; hence, we calculated the range of R 0 using the highest and lowest available values for these parameters. To compare the output of the model to the data from the thirteen countries studied, the growth rate found in Equation 4 was superimposed on the model.
The initial condition a 0 in the exponential function Y = a 0 · (1 + r) t was fitted to the dynamical system with the Nelder-Meade simplex algorithm (17) . It is important to emphasize that fitting the initial value simple creates a translation of the curve. It is, therefore, remarkable that the function that describes the average behavior of the first three weeks around the world, presents a nearly perfect fit to the dynamical system using parameters that were measured in multiple settings by different groups. Figure 3 shows a calculation of the SEYAR model using the parameters reported in Table   1 . This representation of the progression of the disease must be understood as a theoretical development; in reality, the progression of an epidemic depends on a multitude of factors that necessarily result in deviations from this ideal case.
Changes in behavioral patterns in response to an outbreak have an effect on the propagation of a disease. As people gain awareness of the presence of an infectious disease in their communities, a portion will take measures in order to reduce their susceptibility.
An example of this behavior corresponding to the COVID-19 pandemic is that of social distancing. Indeed, the cancellation of events likely to attract crowds, the closing of schools, and working from home will have a drastic impact on the size of the susceptible population at any given time. 
The calculation of R 0 poses significant challenges during the first stages of any outbreak, including the COVID-19 pandemic. This is due to paucity and timing of surveillance data, different methodological approaches to data collection, and different guidelines for testing.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 18.20037994 doi: medRxiv preprint necessary conclusion is that via a computational reductio ad absurdum, in tandem with the information we have today, R 0 cannot be near 3.
It is unlikely that a pathogen that blankets the planet in three months can have a basic The value of R 0 must be understood as a threshold parameter that can be utilized to characterize disease spread. The estimations of R 0 are expected to vary substantially per locality depending on how public health officials communicate the risk to the general public, general beliefs and (dis)information available to the population, and other socioeconomic and environmental factors affecting contact rates. Our goal with this investigation was to develop the SEYAR mean field estimate, which can be applied to different locations to provide a measure of the potential impact of the disease.
This study shows that asymptomatic individuals are major drivers for the growth of the COVID-19 pandemic. The value of R 0 we calculated is at least double and up to one order of magnitude larger than the estimates that have been communicated in the literature and to policymakers up to this point.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 12 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 18.20037994 doi: medRxiv preprint Mean asymptomatic infectious period (λ −1 AR ): Mean number of days an individual who never develops symptoms exhibits viral shedding.
Disease-induced death rate (δ): The rate of fatality caused by disease. It is taken to be the quotient of disease-induced deaths and confirmed cases. Listed below is the generalized SEYAR dynamical system in Equation 5 which falls into the class of models covered by Aguilar and Gutierrez (2020) (31), see Figure 5 .
where, N = S + E + Y + A + R. The demographic parameters Λ and ξ denote the human recruitment and mortality rates, respectively. While λ AY and λ RS are the asymptomatic 13 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 18.20037994 doi: medRxiv preprint to symptomatic transition and relapse rates, respectively.
It is worth mentioning that for a basic SEIR model, where there is only one infected compartment, the progression rate from the susceptible to the exposed class λ SE is equal to the product of the effective contact rate β and the proportion of infected individuals I N , so that λ SE = β I N .
In our model, we decompose the infected compartment into symptomatic and asymptomatic sub-compartments. Due to this decomposition, the progression rate is given by the weighted sum
Disease-Free Equilibrium (DFE) points are solutions of a dynamical system corresponding to the case where no disease is present in the population. 
Then, the DFE w for the SEYAR model in Equation 5 is locally asymptotically stable provided that R 0 < 1 and unstable if R 0 > 1.
Proof. We order the compartments so that the first four correspond to the infected subpopulations and denote w = (E, Y, A, R, S) T . The corresponding DFE is
14 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 18.20037994 doi: medRxiv preprint Utilizing the next generation method developed by Van den Driessche and Watmough (32), system in Equation 5 is rewritten in the following forṁ
where F := (F 1 , . . . , F 5 ) T and V := (V 1 , . . . , V 5 ) T , or more explicitly 
A direct calculation shows that
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 18.20037994 doi: medRxiv preprint and F V −1 is given by the following matrix
Let I denote the 3 × 3 identity matrix, so that the characteristic polynomial P (λ) of the matrix F V −1 is given by
The solution set {λ i } 1≤i≤3 is given by
Therefore, the reproduction number for the SEYAR model in Equation 5 is given by CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 18.20037994 doi: medRxiv preprint susceptible, that is S N ≈ 1. As a result, we arrive at the following equivalent condition
The parameter β in Figure 6 is equal to ab and ω is equal to c −1 . This combination of parameters stands to reason as it is a ratio of the effective contact rate β and the mean infectious period ω −1 .
Since the disease-induced death rate δ ≈ 0, the reproduction number in Equation 2
in the manuscript for our model has a similar natural interpretation as the sum of ratios consisting of the effective contact rates β Y , β A and mean infectious periods λ −1 Y R , λ −1 AR for the symptomatic and asymptomatic sub-populations, weighted with the probabilities of becoming symptomatic (1 − α) or asymptomatic α upon infection.
The effective reproduction number R 0 (t) takes into consideration the susceptibility of the population,
It is defined to be the average number of secondary cases generated by a typical case. A decrease in the susceptible population overtime will cause a corresponding decrease in the values of the reproduction number. It directly follows by Equation 8 that R 0 (0) = R 0 , as initially the total human population is assumed to be susceptible. The plot of R 0 (t) is similar to the plot of the susceptible portion, featured in Figure 3 in the manuscript. This is reasonable since Equation 8 implies that R 0 (t) is proportional to S(t). Since δ ≈ 0, the total population N (t) varies little within a tight envelope around the initial susceptible population S(0). This is easily observable upon inspection of the dynamical system given by Equation 1 in the manuscript, as it is clear that
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 18.20037994 doi: medRxiv preprint . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint .
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 
