Governments around the world are responding to the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic 1 2 with unprecedented policies designed to slow the growth rate of infections. Many actions, 3 such as closing schools and restricting populations to their homes, impose large and visible 4 costs on society. In contrast, the benefits of these policies, in the form of infections that 5 did not occur, cannot be directly observed and are currently understood through process-based 6 simulations. 2-4 Here, we compile new data on 1,659 local, regional, and national anti-contagion 7 policies recently deployed in the ongoing pandemic across localities in China, South Korea, Iran, 8 Italy, France, and the United States (US). We then apply reduced-form econometric methods, 9 commonly used to measure the effect of policies on economic growth, to empirically evaluate 10 the effect that these anti-contagion policies have had on the growth rate of infections. In the 11 absence of any policy actions, we estimate that early infections of COVID-19 exhibit exponential 12 growth rates of roughly 42% per day. We find that anti-contagion policies collectively have had 13 significant effects slowing this growth. Our results suggest that similar policies may have 14 different impacts on different populations, but we obtain consistent evidence that the policy 15 packages now deployed are achieving large, beneficial, and measurable health outcomes. We 16 estimate that, to date, current policies have already prevented or delayed on the order of 62 : medRxiv preprint 65 growth rates. Similarly to early COVID-19 infections, economic output generally increases exponen-66 tially with a variable rate that can be affected by policies and other conditions. Unlike process-based 67 epidemiological models, 7-9, 12, 22, 29, 30 the reduced-form statistical approach to inference that we ap-68 ply does not require explicit prior information about fundamental epidemiological parameters or 69 mechanisms, many of which remain uncertain in the current pandemic. Rather, the collective influ-70 ence of these factors is empirically recovered from the data without modeling their individual effects 71 explicitly (see Methods). Prior work on influenza, 31 for example, has shown that such statistical 72 approaches can provide important complementary information to process-based models.
To construct the dependent variable, we transform location-specific, subnational time-series data 74 on infections into first-differences of their natural logarithm, which is the per-day growth rate of 75 4 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review) : medRxiv preprint infections (see Methods). We use data from first-or second-level administrative units and data on 76 active or cumulative cases, depending on availability (see Supplementary Information) . We then 77 employ widely-used panel regression models 23, 24 to estimate how the daily growth rate of infections 78 changes over time within a location when different combinations of large-scale social policies are 79 enacted (see Methods). Our econometric approach accounts for differences in the baseline growth 80 rate of infections across sub-national locations, which may be affected by time-invariant charac-81 teristics, such as demographics, socio-economic status, culture, and health systems; it accounts for 82 systematic patterns in growth rates within countries unrelated to policy, such as the effect of the 83 work-week; it is robust to systematic under-surveillance specific to each sub-national unit; and it 84 accounts for changes in procedures to diagnose positive cases (see Methods and Supplementary 85 Information). The reduced-form statistical techniques we use are designed to measure the total 86 magnitude of the effect of changes in policy, without attempting to explain the origin of baseline 87 growth rates or the specific epidemiological mechanisms linking policy changes to infection growth 88 rates (see Methods). Thus, this approach does not provide the important mechanistic insights 89 generated by process-based models; however, it does effectively quantify the key policy-relevant re-90 lationships of interest using recent real-world data, when fundamental epidemiological parameters 91 are still uncertain. 92 Results 93 We estimate that in the absence of policy, early infection rates of COVID-19 grow 42% per day on 94 average (Standard Error [SE] = 7%), implying a doubling time of approximately 2 days. Country-95 specific estimates range from 24% per day in China (SE = 9%) to 69% per day in Iran (SE = 96 5%). Growth rates in South Korea, Italy, France, and the US are very near the 42% average 97 value (Figure 2a). These estimated values differ from observed growth rates because the latter are 98 confounded by the effects of policy. These growth rates are not driven by the expansion of testing or 99 increasing rates of case detection (see Methods and Extended Data Fig. 2) and are not dependent 100 on data from any particular region of any country (Extended Data Fig. 3).
The 2019 novel coronavirus 1 (COVID-19) pandemic is forcing societies around the world to make 22 consequential policy decisions with limited information. After containment of the initial outbreak 23 failed, attention turned to implementing large-scale social policies designed to slow contagion of 24 the virus, 6 with the ultimate goal of slowing the rate at which life-threatening cases emerge so as 25 to not exceed the capacity of existing medical systems. In general, these policies aim to decrease It is therefore not surprising that some populations hesitate before implementing such dramatic 40 policies, particularly when these costs are visible while their health benefits -infections and deaths 41 that would have occurred but instead were avoided or delayed -are unseen. Our objective is to 42 measure the direct health benefits of these policies; specifically, how much these policies slowed the 43 growth rate of infections. We treat recently implemented policies as hundreds of different natural 44 experiments proceeding in parallel. Our hope is to learn from the recent experience of six countries 45 where early spread of the virus triggered large-scale policy actions, in part so that societies and 46 decision-makers in the remaining 180+ countries can access this information. 47 Here we directly estimate the effects of 1,659 local, regional, and national policies on the growth 48 rate of infections across localities within China, France, Iran, Italy, South Korea, and the US (see ological factors, such as disease infectivity and contact networks, as well as policies that induce 59 behavior changes. 7, 8, 22 We cannot experimentally manipulate policies ourselves, but because they 60 are being deployed while the epidemic unfolds, we can estimate their effects empirically. We exam-61 ine how the daily growth rate of infections in each locality changes in response to the collection of 62 ongoing policies applied to that locality on that day. 63 We employ well-established "reduced-form" econometric techniques 23, 24 commonly used to mea-64 sure the effects of policies 25, 26 or other events (e.g., wars 27 or environmental changes 28 ) on economic growth rates until after a fixed number of days, but we do not find evidence this improves model 144 fit (Extended Data Fig. 5b ). 145 The estimates described above (Figure 2b ) capture the superposition of all policies deployed 146 in each country, i.e., they represent the average effect of policies on infection growth rates that 147 we would expect to observe if all policies enacted anywhere in each country were implemented 148 simultaneously in a region of that country. We also estimate the effects of individual policies or 149 clusters of policies that are grouped either based on their similarity in goal (e.g., library closures and 150 museum closures are grouped) or timing (e.g., policies that are generally deployed simultaneously 151 in a certain country). In many cases, our estimates for these effects are statistically noisier than 152 the estimates for all policies combined because we are estimating multiple effects simultaneously. 153 Thus, we are less confident in the individual estimates and in their relative rankings. Estimated 154 effects differ between countries, and policies are neither identical nor perfectly comparable in their 155 implementation across countries or, in many cases, across different localities within the same coun- mates that are positive, five of which are small in magnitude (< 0.1) and not statistically different 160 from zero (5% level). Consistent with greater overall uncertainty in these dis-aggregated estimates, 161 some in China, France, Italy, and South Korea are somewhat more sensitive to dropping regional 162 blocks of data (Extended Data Fig. 4) . The estimated effects of individual policies are broadly 163 robust to assuming a constant delayed effect of all policies (Extended Data Fig. 5c ). 164 We combine the estimates above with our data on the timing of the 1,659 policy deployments 165 to estimate the total effect of all policies across the dates in our sample. To do this, we use our 166 estimates to predict the growth rate of infections in each locality on each day, given the policies 167 in effect at that location on that date (Figure 3 , blue markers). We then use the same model 168 to predict what counterfactual growth rates would be on that date if all policies were removed 169 ( Figure 3 , red markers), which we refer to as a "no-policy scenario." The difference between these 170 two predictions is our estimated effect that all anti-contagion policies actually deployed had on 171 the growth rate of infections. We estimate that since the beginning of our sample, on average, Table 4 ) or assuming a delayed effect of policy on infection growth rates (Supplementary Table 5 ). we study would have initially followed rapid exponential growth had no policies been applied, 208 our results suggest that these ongoing policies are currently providing large health benefits. For . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.22.20040642 doi: medRxiv preprint policies had not already been deployed. Consistent with process-based simulations of COVID-19 212 infections, 2, 4, 10-12, 14, 17, 29 our empirical analysis of existing policies indicates that seemingly small 213 delays in policy deployment likely produce dramatically different health outcomes. 214 While the limited amount of currently available data poses challenges to our analysis, our aim 215 is to use what data exist to estimate the first-order impacts of unprecedented policy actions in an 216 ongoing global crisis. As more data become available, empirical research findings will become more 217 precise and may capture more complex interactions. For example, this analysis does not account for 218 potentially important interactions between populations in nearby localities, 7, 38 nor the structure 219 of mobility networks. 3, 4, 10, 12, 17, 39 Nonetheless, we hope the results we are able to obtain at this 220 early stage of the pandemic can support critical decision-making, both in the countries we study 221 and in the other 180+ countries where COVID-19 infections have been reported.
A key advantage of our reduced-form "top down" statistical approach is that it captures the real-223 world behavior of affected populations without requiring that we explicitly model all underlying 224 mechanisms and processes. This property is useful in the current stage of the pandemic when 225 many process-related parameters remain unknown. However, our results cannot and should not be 226 interpreted as a substitute for process-based epidemiological models specifically designed to provide 227 guidance in public health crises. Rather, our results complement existing models, for example, 228 by helping to calibrate key model parameters. We believe both forward-looking simulations and 229 backward-looking empirical evaluations should be used to inform decision-making. 230 Our analysis measures changes in local infection growth rates associated with changes in anti-231 contagion policies, treating each subnational administrative unit as if it were in a natural experi-232 ment. Intuitively, each administrative unit observed just prior to a policy deployment serves as the 233 "control" for the same unit in the days after it receives a policy "treatment". Thus, a necessary 234 condition for our estimates to be interpreted as the plausibly causal effect of these policies is that 235 the timing of policy deployment is independent of infection growth rates. 23 Such an assumption is 236 supported by epidemiological theory, which predicts that infection totals in the absence of policy 237 will be near-perfectly exponential early in the epidemic, 7 implying that pre-policy infection growth 238 rates in this context should be constant. The policies we analyze are unlikely to have been de-239 10 ployed in reaction to or anticipation of changes in growth rates, since epidemiological guidance to 240 decision-makers explicitly projected constant growth rates in the absence of anti-contagion mea-241 sures. 2, 29, 40, 41 In practice, decision-makers have tended to deploy policies in response to the count 242 of total infections in their locality, rather than their growth rate, 2 in response to outbreaks in other overstate the effectiveness of anti-contagion policies. We note, however, that if public information 260 is increasing in response to policy actions, then it should be considered a pathway through which 261 policies alter infection growth, not a form of bias. Investigating these potential effects is beyond 262 the scope of this analysis, but it is an important topic for future investigations.
While our analysis has focused on changes in the growth rate of infections, other outcomes, 264 such as hospitalizations or deaths, are also of policy interest. Because these outcomes are more 265 context-and state-dependent than infection growth rates, their analysis in future work may require 266 additional modeling approaches. Nonetheless, we experimentally implement our approach on the 267 11 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review) daily growth rate of hospitalizations in France, the only country in our sample where we were able 268 to obtain hospitalization data at the granularity of this study. We find that the total estimated 269 effect of anti-contagion policies on the growth rate of hospitalizations is similar to our reported 270 effect on the infection growth rate (Extended Data Fig. 6c ).
Here we exclusively analyzed large-scale anti-contagion social policies to understand their effects 272 on infection growth rates within a locality. However, contact tracing, international travel restric-273 tions, and medical resource management, along with many other policy decisions, will play key 274 roles in the global response to COVID-19. Our results do not speak to the efficacy of these other CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review) 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review) 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review) 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review) 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review) . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review) . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. Figure 3 : Estimated infection growth rates based on actual anti-contagion policies and in a no-policy counterfactual scenario. Predicted daily growth rates of active (China and South Korea) or cumulative (all others) COVID-19 infections based on the observed timing of all policy deployments within each country (blue) and in a scenario where no policies were deployed (red). The difference between these two predictions is our estimated effect of actual anti-contagion policies on the growth rate of infections. Small markers are daily estimates for subnational administrative units (vertical lines are 95% CI). Large markers are national averages. Black circles are observed daily changes in log(inf ections), averaged across administrative units.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review) . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. 400 We provide a brief summary of our data collection processes here (see the Supplementary Notes 401 for more details, including access dates). Epidemiological, case definition/testing regime, and pol-402 icy data for each of the six countries in our sample were collected from a variety of in-country 403 data sources, including government public health websites, regional newspaper articles, and crowd-404 sourced information on Wikipedia. The availability of epidemiological and policy data varied across 405 the six countries, and preference was given to collecting data at the most granular administrative Iran We used epidemiological data from the table "New COVID-19 cases in Iran by province" 4 427 in the "2020 coronavirus pandemic in Iran" Wikipedia article, which were compiled from the data 428 provided on the Iranian Ministry of Health website (in Persian). We relied on news media reporting 429 and two timelines of pandemic events in Iran 5 6 to collate policy data. 430 1 https://github.com/BlankerL/DXY-COVID-19-Data 2 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2020 Hubei lockdowns 3 https://github.com/Pratitya/wuhan2020-timeline 4 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2020 coronavirus pandemic in Iran 5 https://www.thinkglobalhealth.org/article/updated-timeline-coronavirus 6 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2020 coronavirus pandemic in Iran
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. website, which was previously updated daily through March 25. 11 We obtained data on France's 438 policy response to the COVID-19 pandemic from the French government website, 12 press releases 439 from each regional public health site, 13 and Wikipedia. 14 440 United States We used state-level epidemiological data from usafacts.org, 15 which they compile 441 from multiple sources. For policy responses, we relied on a number of sources, including the U.S.
Centers for Disease Control (CDC), the National Governors Association, as well as various executive 443 orders from county-and city-level governments, and press releases from media outlets. 23 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. Reduced-Form Approach The reduced-form econometric approach that we apply here is a 465 "top down" approach that describes the behavior of aggregate outcomes y in data (here, infection 466 rates). This approach can identify plausibly causal effects 23, 24 induced by exogenous changes in 467 independent policy variables z (e.g., school closure) without explicitly describing all underlying 468 mechanisms that link z to y, without observing intermediary variables x (e.g., behavior) that might 469 link z to y, or without other determinants of y unrelated to z (e.g., demographics), denoted w. Let 470 f (·) describe a complex and unobserved process that generates infection rates y:
Process-based epidemiological models aim to capture elements of f (·) explicitly, and then simulate 472 how changes in z, x, or w affect y. This approach is particularly important and useful in forward-473 looking simulations where future conditions are likely to be different than historical conditions.
However, a challenge faced by this approach is that we may not know the full structure of f (·), for 475 example if a pathogen is new and many key biological and societal parameters remain uncertain.
Crucially, we may not know the effect that large-scale policy (z) will have on behavior (x(z)) or 477 how this behavior change will affect infection rates (f (·)). 
where I t is the number of infected individuals at time t, β is the transmission rate (new infections 491 per day per infected individual), γ is the removal rate (proportion of infected individuals recovering 492 24 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.22.20040642 doi: medRxiv preprint or dying each day) and S is the fraction of the population susceptible to the disease. The second 493 equality holds in the limit S → 1, which describes the current conditions during the beginning 494 of the COVID-19 pandemic. The solution to this ordinary differential equation is the exponential
where I t1 is the initial condition. Taking the natural logarithm and rearranging, we have
Anti-contagion policies are designed to alter g, through changes to β, by reducing contact between 498 susceptible and infected individuals. Holding the time-step between observations fixed at one day 499 (t 2 − t 1 = 1), we thus model g as a time-varying outcome that is a linear function of a time-varying 500 policy 501
where θ 0 is the average growth rate absent policy, policy t is a binary variable describing whether a 502 policy is deployed at time t, and θ is the average effect of the policy on growth rate g over all periods 503 subsequent to the policy's introduction, thereby encompassing any lagged effects of policies. t is 504 a mean-zero disturbance term that captures inter-period changes not described by policy t . Using 505 this approach, infections each day are treated as the initial conditions for integrating Equation 4
506 through to the following day. 507 We compute the first differences log(I t ) − log(I t−1 ) using active infections where they are avail-508 able, otherwise we use cumulative infections, noting that they are almost identical during this early 509 period (except in China, where we use active infections). We then match these data to policy vari-510 ables that we construct using the novel data sets we assemble and apply a reduced-form approach To ensure data quality, we restrict our analysis to localities after they have 517 reported at least ten cumulative infections. 518 We estimate a multiple regression version of Equation 6 using ordinary least squares. We 519 include a vector of subnational unit-fixed effects θ 0 (i.e., varying intercepts captured as coefficients 520 to dummy variables) to account for all time-invariant factors that affect the local growth rate of 521 infections, such as differences in demographics, socio-economic status, culture, and health systems. 24 522 We include a vector of day-of-week-fixed effects δ to account for weekly patterns in the growth rate 523 of infections that are common across locations within a country, however, in China, we omit day-524 of-week effects because we find no evidence they are present in the data -perhaps due to the fact 525 that the outbreak of COVID-19 began during a national holiday and workers never returned to 526 work. We also include a separate single-day dummy variable each time there is an abrupt change 527 in the availability of COVID-19 testing or a change in the procedure to diagnose positive cases.
Such changes generally manifest as a discontinuous jump in infections and a re-scaling of subsequent 529 25 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.22.20040642 doi: medRxiv preprint infection rates (e.g., See China in Figure 1 ), effects that are flexibly absorbed by a single-day dummy 530 variable because the dependent variable is the first-difference of the logarithm of infections. We 531 denote the vector of these testing dummies µ.
Lastly, we include a vector of P c country-specific policy variables for each location and day. In some cases (for Italy and the US), policy data is available at a more spatially granular level 547 than infection data (e.g., city policies and state-level infections in the US). In these cases, we code 548 binary policy variables at the more granular level and use population-weights to aggregate them to 549 the level of the infection data. Thus, policy variables may take on continuous values between zero 550 and one, with a value of one indicating that the policy is fully enacted for the entire population.
Given the limited quantity of data currently available, we use a parsimonious model that assumes 552 the effects of policies on infection growth rates are approximately linear and additively separable.
However, future work that possesses more data may be able to identify important nonlinearities or 554 interactions between policies.
For each country, our general multiple regression model is thus
where observations are indexed by country c, subnational unit i, and day t. The parameters of 557 interest are the country-by-policy specific coefficients θ cp . We display the estimated residuals cit is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.22.20040642 doi: medRxiv preprint sum.
Note that our estimates of θ and θ 0 in Equation 7 are robust to systematic under-reporting of infections, a major concern in the ongoing pandemic, due to the construction of our dependent variable. This remains true even if different localities have different rates of under-reporting, so long as the rate of under-reporting is relatively constant. To see this, note that if each locality i has a medical system that reports only a fraction ψ i of infections such that we observeĨ it = ψ i I it rather an actual infections I it , then the left-hand-side of Equation 7 will be However, if the rate of under-reporting within a locality is changing day-to-day, this could bias infection growth rates. We estimate the magnitude of this bias (see Extended Data Fig. 2) , and verify that it is quantitatively small. Specifically, ifĨ it = ψ it I it where ψ it changes day-to-day, then
where log(ψ it )−log(ψ i,t−1 ) is the day-over-day growth rate of the case-detection probability. Disease 576 surveillance has evolved slowly in some locations as governments gradually expand testing, which 577 would cause ψ it to change over time, but these changes in testing capacity do not appear to 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . the effect of a policy implemented one week ago is allowed to differ arbitrarily from the effect of 594 that same policy in the following week, etc. These effects are then estimated simultaneously and 595 are displayed in Fig. 2 (also Supplementary Table 3) . Such a distributed lag approach did not 596 provide statistically meaningful insight in other countries using currently available data because 597 there were fewer administrative units and shorter periods of observation (i.e. smaller samples), and 598 more policies (i.e. more parameters to estimate) in all other countries. Future work may be able 599 to successfully explore these dynamics outside of China. 600 We also explore the day-by-day response to the first anti-contagion policies in a limited number 601 Chinese cities using an event study approach. 44 We examine the 36 cities in which five days of 602 infection growth data immediately before and after deployment of the first anti-contagion policy 603 (home isolation) are available (similar samples were unavailable in the other countries we study).
Pooling these data, we then estimate average rates of infection growth five days before deployment, 605 four days before, etc., shown in Extended Data Fig. 5a . In this limited sample of cities, we find 606 that infection growth rates separate from the average pre-policy growth rate within the first three 607 days following deployment of the policy.
As a robustness check, we examine whether excluding the transient response from the estimated 609 effects of policy substantially alters our results. We do this by estimating a "fixed lag" model, 610 where we assume that policies cannot influence infection growth rates for L days, recoding a policy 611 variable at time t as zero if a policy was implemented fewer than L days before t. We re-estimate Table 5 . 614 Alternative disease models Our main empirical specification is motivated with an SIR model 615 of disease contagion, which assumes zero latent period between exposure to COVID-19 and infec-616 tiousness. If we relax this assumption to allow for a latent period of infection, as in a Susceptible- Location-and-day specific counterfactual predictions (ĝ no policy cit ), accounting for the covariance of 637 errors in estimated parameters, are shown as red markers in Figure 3 . 638 Cumulative infections To provide a sense of scale for the estimated cumulative benefits of effects shown in Figure 3 , we link our reduced-form empirical estimates to the key structures in a simple SIR system and simulate this dynamical system over the course of our sample. The system is defined as the following:
where S t is the susceptible population and R t is the removed population. Here β t is a time-evolving 639 parameter, determined via our empirical estimates as described below. Accounting for changes in S 640 becomes increasingly important as the size of cumulative infections (I t + R t ) becomes a substantial 641 fraction of the local subnational population, which occurs in some no-policy scenarios. Our reduced-642 form analysis provides estimates for the growth rate of active infections (ĝ) for each locality and 643 day, in a regime where S t ≈ 1. Thus we know for which we observe 10 or more cases (for that unit) using a time-step of 4 hours. Given we observe 656 29 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.22.20040642 doi: medRxiv preprint confirmed cases, rather than true infections, in our data, we seed each simulation by assuming I t on 657 the first day is equal to the number of observed cases divided by country-specific estimates of the 658 proportion of infections confirmed. 36 We assume R t = 0 on the first day. To maintain consistency 659 with the reported data, we report our output in confirmed cases by multiplying our simulated Table   687 1, LYH, JL created SI Table 2, JT created SI Table 3, JT created SI Table 4 CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. local administrative units that are more spatially granular than the data in the JHU CSSE database. a, In China, we aggregate our city-level data to the province level, and b, in Korea we aggregate province-level data up to the country level. Small discrepancies, especially in later periods of the outbreak, are generally due to imported cases (international or domestic) that are present in national statistics but which we do not assign to particular cities (in China) or provinces (in Korea).
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. For each country, we re-estimated Eq. 7 using real data k times, each time withholding one of the k first-level administrative regions ("Adm1," i.e. state or province) in that country. Each gray circle is either ( a ) the estimated no-policy growth rate or ( b ) the total effect of all policies combined, from one of these k regressions. Red and blue circles show estimates from the full sample, identical to results presented in panels A and B of Figure 2 , respectively. For each country panel, if a single region is influential, the estimated value when it is withheld from the sample will appear as an outlier. Some regions that appear influential are highlighted with an open pink circle. As in Figure 2B of the main text, we estimate a distributed lag model for China and display each of the estimated weekly lag effects (red circle is the same "without Hubei" sample for lags).
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. Existing evidence has not demonstrated whether policies should affect infection growth rates in the days immediately following deployment. It is therefore not clear ex ante whether the policy variables in Eq. 7 should be encoded as "on" immediately following a policy deployment. We estimate "fixed-lag" models in which a fixed delay between a policy's deployment and its effect is assumed (see Supplementary Methods 3). If a delay model is more consistent with real world infection dynamics, these fixed lag models should recover larger estimates for the impact of policies and exhibit better model fit. a , Because data from China cover a longer period with fewer policies that are each implemented early in the sample, we estimated an explicit distributed lag model in the main article ( Figure  2 ), finding evidence of policy impacts in the first week of deployment and evidence that these effects increase in the following weeks. Using a reduced sample of 36 Chinese cities where at least five days of infection data are available before and after the first policy ( home isolation ) is deployed, we implement an event study. Orange markers show the 3 average infection growth rate in the five days immediately prior to and following the first policy deployment. b , R-squared values associated with fixed-lag lengths varying from zero to fifteen days. In-sample fit generally declines or remains unchanged if policies are assumed to have a delay longer than four days (whiskers are 95% CI computed through resampling). c , Estimated effects for no lag (the model reported in the main text) and for fixed-lags between one and five days. Estimates generally are unchanged or shrink towards zero (e.g. Home isolation in Iran), consistent with mis-coding of post-policy days as no-policy days. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. Figure 3 in the main text, but using an alternative disaggregated encoding of policies that does not group any policies into policy packages. b , Same as Figure 3 in the main text, but Eq. 7 is implemented for a single example administrative unit, Wuhan, China. c , Same as Figure   3 in the main text, but using hospitalization data from France rather than cumulative cases, since the French government stopped reporting the latter after March 25, 2020. For all panels, the difference between the with-and no-policy predictions is our estimated effect of actual anti-contagion policies on the growth rate of infections (or hospitalizations). The markers are daily estimates for each subnational administrative unit (vertical lines are 95% confidence intervals). Black circles are observed changes in log( infections ) (or diamonds for log( hospitalizations )), averaged across the same administrative unit.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. Figure 4 in the main text uses γ = 0.079, which we calculate using empirical recovery/death rates in countries where we observe them (China and South Korea, see Methods). If we assume a 14-day delay between infected individuals becoming non-infectious and being reported as "recovered" in the data, we would calculate γ = 0.18. Figure 4 in the main text assumes σ = ∞.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. Each histogram shows the distribution of econometrically estimated values across 1,000 simulated outbreaks. Estimates are for the no-policy infection growth rate (analogous to Figure 2A ) when three different policies are deployed at random moments in time. The black line shows the correct value imposed on the simulation and the red histogram shows the distribution of estimates using the regression in Eq. 7, applied to data output from the simulation. The grey dashed line shows the mean of this distribution. The 12 subpanels describe the results when various values are assigned to the mean latency period ( γ -1 ) and mean infectious period ( σ -1 ) of the disease. " σ = ∞" is equivalent to SIR disease dynamics. In each panel, S min is the minimum susceptible fraction observed across all 1,000 45-day simulations shown in each panel. For reference, in the real datasets used in the main text, after correcting for country-specific underreporting, S min across all units analyzed is 0.78 and 95% of the analyzed units finish with S min > 0.93. "Bias" refers to the distance between the dashed grey and black line as a percentage of the true value. a , Simulations in near-ideal data conditions in which we observe active infections within a large population (such that the susceptible fraction of the population remains high during the sample period). For example, these conditions are similar to those in our real data for Chongqing, China. b , Simulations in a non-ideal data scenario where we are only able to observe cumulative infections in a small population. For example, these conditions are similar to those in our real sample of data for Cremona, Italy.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. Figure 2B ) that are deployed at random moments in time.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. 
Describes the data acquisition and processing for the epidemiological and policy data. The sources for both types of data come from a variety of in-country data sources, which include government public health websites, regional newspaper articles, and Wikipedia crowd-sourced information. We have supplemented this data with international data compilations.
Describes sensitivity analyses and simulations performed to verify the robustness of our model, including: the sensitivity of our regression model and counterfactual projections to varying epidemiological parameters; and the sensitivity of our estimates to alternative lag structures, withholding of data, and differing policy groupings.
Contains tables detailing: 1) the number of anti-contagion policies tabulated by administrative division in each country; 2) the main regression results estimating the effect of policy on growth rates; and 3) epidemiological data in Wuhan prior to policy intervention, and estimates of the initial infection growth rate and case doubling times.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. The Supplementary Notes section describes the data acquisition and processing procedure for the epidemiological and policy data used in this paper. The sources for both types of data come from a variety of in-country data sources, which include government public health websites, regional newspaper articles, and Wikipedia crowd-sourced information. We have supplemented this data with international data compilations. A list of the epidemiological and policy data compiled for this analysis can be found here .
The Supplementary Methods section describes sensitivity analyses and simulations performed to verify the robustness of our model, including: the sensitivity of our regression model and counterfactual projections to varying epidemiological parameters; and the sensitivity of our estimates to alternative lag structures, withholding of data, and differing policy groupings.
The Supplementary Tables section contains tables detailing: 1) the number of anti-contagion policies tabulated by administrative division in each country; 2) epidemiological data in Wuhan prior to policy intervention, and estimates of the initial infection growth rate and case doubling times; and 3) the main regression results estimating the effect of policy on growth rates.
1 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. Additional metadata accompanying the health outcome variables: 1. " date ": The date of observation. 2. " adm0_name ": The ISO3 (country) code to which this observation belongs.
3. " adm1_name ": The name of the "Adm1" region (typically state or province) to which this observation belongs. 4. " adm2_name ": If the dataset contains observations at the "Adm2" level, then this is the name of the "Adm2" region to which this observation belongs (e.g. counties in the United States). 5. " adm[1,2]_id ": Any alphanumeric ID scheme to identify different administrative units (e.g. FIPS code in the United States). 6. " lat ": The latitude of the centroid of the administrative unit. 7. " lon ": The longitude of the centroid of the administrative unit. 8. " policies_enacted ": The number of active policies that are in place for the administrative unit as of that date. This variable is not population weighted. 9. " testing_regime ": A categorical variable used to identify when an administrative region changed their COVID-19 testing regime. This is zero-indexed, with the ordering only indicating chronological progression (there is no external meaning to Regime 2 vs. Regime 1 vs. Regime 0, and there is no consistency enforced for coding across countries). For example, if China changes their testing regime twice, all observations prior to the first regime change would be coded " testing_regime =0," all observations in between the two changes would be coded 2 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . " testing_regime =1," and all observations after the second change would be coded " testing_regime =2." 10. " population ": The population of the administrative unit. 11. " pop_is_imputed ": A binary variable equal to 1 if the population is imputed, and 0 otherwise.
Used for imputing the population of some cities in China.
Data Imputation:
In instances where health outcome observations are missing or suffer from data quality issues, we have imputed to fill in the missing values. Imputed health outcome variables are denoted by " [health_outcome]_imputed. " For the majority of our analyses we do not use imputed data; France is the exception where we impute two days of missing data. We do this to ensure we have variation in policy variables for use in the analysis.
We impute by: 1. Taking the natural log of the non-missing observations pertaining to that health outcome variable. 2. Linearly interpolating over the missing dates for that health outcome variable. 3. Exponentiating the interpolated values back into levels and rounding to the nearest integer.
We have collated a city-level time series health outcome dataset in China for 339 cities from January 10, 2020 to April 7, 2020.
For data from January 24, 2020 onwards, we relied on the public dataset Ding Xiang Yuan (DXY) that 1 reports daily statistics across Chinese cities. Since DXY only publishes the most recent (cross-sectional) statistics (and not the historical data), we used the time series dataset scraped from DXY in an open source GitHub project . The web scraper program checks for updates at least once a 2 day for the statistics published on DXY and records any changes in the number of cumulative confirmed cases, cumulative recoveries or cumulative deaths.
We assumed that no updates to the statistics meant there had been no new cases. We dropped a small number of cases that had been recorded but not assigned to a specific city (many of these cases are imported ones from other cities). We also dropped confirmed cases in prison populations (we assumed the spread of COVID-19 in prisons was not affected by the implementation of city-level lockdowns or travel ban policies).
For city level health outcomes prior to January 24, 2020, we manually collected official daily statistics from the central and provincial (Hubei, Guangdong, and Zhejiang ) Chinese government websites. 3 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . We did not collect city level health outcomes recorded prior to January 24, 2020 in provinces that had fewer than ten confirmed cases at that date. We made this decision since our analysis dropped observations with fewer than ten cumulative confirmed cases to prevent noisy data during the early transmission phase from disproportionately biasing the estimated results.
After merging the two datasets, we conducted a few quality checks:
(1) We checked that cumulative confirmed cases, cumulative recoveries, and cumulative deaths were increasing over time. In instances when cumulative outcomes decreased over time, we assumed that the recent numbers were more reliable, and treated the earlier number of cumulative cases as missing (this was often due to data entry errors or cases where patients that were reported to have been diagnosed with COVID-19, but were later found out to actually have tested negative). The magnitude of these errors was relatively small. We filled in any missing data with the imputation methodology described in the health data overview section.
(2) We validated our city-level dataset by aggregating observations up to the provincial level and comparing the time trends from the aggregated dataset to that of the provincial dataset collated by Johns Hopkins University. We confirmed that the two datasets matched very closely (see Figure A2 7 Panel A).
During our sample period starting January 16, 2020, the criteria for being diagnosed with COVID-19 changed five times in China. On January 18, 2020, China began using the reverse transcription 8 polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test in addition to genome sequencing to confirm the SARS-CoV-2 infection in suspected cases. China also no longer required failure in antibiotic treatment and began 9 considering patients who were not exposed to markets in Wuhan but had contact with symptomatic persons from Wuhan. On January 28, 2020, China began considering patients not necessarily linked 10 to Wuhan with at least two out of the previous three required clinical manifestations. On February 11 13, 2020, China created a separate "clinically confirmed" case definition for the Hubei province, which counted patients who met clinical criteria through chest imaging and may not have had epidemiological links or a positive PCR test. On February 20, 2020, China reversed this decision and 12 removed the separate "clinically confirmed" case definition for Hubei. On March 4, 2020, China 13 4 信息发布--湖北省卫生健康委员会 (Information release -Hubei Provincial Health Commission) 5 广东省卫生健康委员会网站 (Information Release -Guangdong Provincial Health Commission) 6 浙江省人民政府门户网站疫情通告 (Information Release -Zhejiang Provincial Health Commission) 7 CSSEGISandData/COVID-19: Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) Cases, provided by JHU CSSE 8 'Confusion breeds distrust:' China keeps changing how it counts coronavirus cases 9 Impact of changing case definitions for COVID-19 on the epidemic curve and transmission parameters in mainland China 10 Impact of changing case definitions for COVID-19 on the epidemic curve and transmission parameters in mainland China 11 Impact of changing case definitions for COVID-19 on the epidemic curve and transmission parameters in mainland China 12 wuhan2020-timeline/时间线TIMELINE.md at master · Pratitya/wuhan2020-timeline ; Why China's Huge Increase in New COVID-19 Cases Is Actually a Step in the Right Direction . We have found another data source indicating that this case definition change happened on February 5 ( Impact of changing case definitions for COVID-19 on the epidemic curve and transmission parameters in mainland China ); we control for both dates. 13 Impact of changing case definitions for COVID-19 on the epidemic curve and transmission parameters in mainland China Affiliation ; China records 2 straight days of fewer than 1,000 new COVID-19 cases 4 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.22.20040642 doi: medRxiv preprint expanded the possible laboratory confirmation tests for SARS-CoV-2 to include serology. We 14 included this information in the dataset because it could have potentially changed the levels and short-term growth rates of the number of confirmed cases.
The testing regime date changes are encoded within the data cleaning script.
We have collated a regional-level time series confirmed cases dataset in France from February 15, 2020 to March 25, 2020, and regional-level time series hospitalization data from March 3, 2020 to April 6, 2020.
We used the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases by région from France's government website. The 15 sources listed for this dataset were the French public health website, the Ministry of Solidarity and 16 Health, French newspapers that reported government information, and regional public health 17 18 websites. Given that these data were not published on a daily basis, we supplemented the dataset by 19 scraping the number of confirmed cases by région on the French public health website through March 25, 2020, which is the last date the subnational case data are made publicly available. 20
Hospitalization data come from the same source ( Santé Publique France ) as the case data . Santé
Publique France announced they would stop posting regional-level case data because they were not reliable, and only provide hospitalization data instead.
The one testing regime change in France occurred on March 13, 2020 with the beginning of the epidemic "stade 3", when the government started to give severe cases in hospitals priority for testing. The testing regime date changes are encoded within the data cleaning script. 22 
We have collated a provincial-level time series health outcome dataset in South Korea from January 20, 2020 to April 6, 2020. 5 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.22.20040642 doi: medRxiv preprint reporting the number of confirmed cases on a daily basis. For these provinces, we recorded this published health data.
Given that the province of Gangwon-do does not report provincial-level health data, we refer to the 28 daily number of new cases reported by each of its counties (Chuncheon-si, Wonju-si, Gangneung-si, 29 30 Taebaek-si, Sokcho-si, and Samcheok-si ). As a result, we manually collected the number of new not explicitly publish the number of cumulative confirmed cases. However, they did publish patient-level data, including the date when patients had tested positive. For these provinces, we constructed the measure of cumulative confirmed cases by counting the number of daily confirmed cases and adding it to the previous date's total.
Most provinces did not publish the number of deaths. Instead, we checked the daily policy briefings posted on the government homepages mentioned in the footnotes and manually collected mortality data. In instances when mortality data were not found in the briefings, we obtained the mortality data from other sources, such as through social media sources (e.g. Facebook) and blogs maintained by local governments. Lastly, we supplemented these sources with mortality data reported in news articles.
We collected information on testing regime changes using press releases from the Korean Center for Disease Control and Prevention (KCDC). In the press release menu, the KCDC uploaded daily briefing announcements which contained information on testing criteria and changes to its testing regime. 45 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.22.20040642 doi: medRxiv preprint symptoms within 14 days after visiting Wuhan South China Seafood Wholesale Market and 2) those who had pneumonia symptoms within 14 days after returning from Wuhan. 46 As the outbreak spread, the KCDC broadened the criteria for testing. Starting January 28, 2020, the agency isolated 1) those who had fever or respiratory symptoms upon returning from Hubei province and 2) those who had symptoms of pneumonia upon returning from mainland China. , We coded 47 48 this as the first change in the testing regime.
The second testing regime change occurred on February 4, 2020, when the KCDC announced that people who had had any "routine contacts" with confirmed cases were required to self quarantine for a 14-day period. The agency defines two categories of contacts: close contacts and routine contacts. The former is defined as a person who has been within two meters of, in the same room as, or exposed to any respiratory secretions of an infected individual. The latter refers to whether the individual conducted any activity in the same place and at the same time as the infected person. Prior to this regime change, the KCDC separated those two cases and applied different quarantine policies; starting February 4, 2020, any routine contacts were also required to be self-quarantined. 49 Shortly thereafter, South Korea aggressively expanded the scope of their testing. Starting February 7, 2020, the KCDC broadened the definition of suspected cases to 1) anyone who developed a fever or respiratory symptoms within 14 days after returning from China, 2) anyone who developed a fever or respiratory symptoms within 14 days after being in close contact with a confirmed case, and 3) anyone suspected of contracting COVID-19 based on their travel history to affected countries and their clinical symptoms. Moreover, the KCDC announced that the test would be free for all suspected cases and 50 confirmed cases. As a result of these efforts, KCDC announced that they would begin to test 3,000 51 people daily, a marked increase from only 200 people a day previously. 52
The KCDC revised their guidelines on February 20, 2020 in order to test more people. Their press release stated: "Suspected cases with a medical professional's recommendation, regardless of travel history, will get tested. Additionally, those who are hospitalized with unknown pneumonia will also be tested. Lastly, anybody in contact with a diagnosed individual will need to self-isolate, and will only be released when they test negative on the thirteenth day of isolation." 53 46 중국 후베이성 우한시 폐렴환자 집단발생 | 보도자료 | 알림·자료 (Pneumonia Outbreak in Wuhan City, Hubei, China) 47 신종코로나바이러스감염증 국내 발생 현황(1월 26일, 사례정의 확대) | 보도자료 | 알림·자료 (COVID-19 Domestic Status (Jan 26, Case Definition Broadened)) 48 NB: The KCDC English website explains the testing regime change in a more condensed format: "Any citizens identified with a fever or respiratory symptoms and have visited Wuhan will be isolated and tested at a nationally designated isolation hospital, and any foreigners staying in Korea will be conducted in cooperation with police." Urges cooperation in preventing the spread of 2019-nCoV in community | Press Release | News Room : KCDC 49 알림 > 보도자료 내용보기 " 신종 코로나바이러스 감염증 대응지침 일부 변경 " (Revision in the Guidance Documents for COVID-19) 50 The updates on novel Coronavirus in Korea (since 3 January) | Press Release | News Room : KCDC NB: The date of this press release is February 8, 2020, but the definition of "suspected cases" was effective starting from February 7, 2020. 51 NB: The testing fee was already somewhat affordable; a person needed to pay 160,000 KRW (about $130 USD). A related article can be found here: 5 신종코로나 진단검사 비용은 얼마? (How much is the COVID-19 testing fee?) 52 신종 코로나바이러스감염증 중앙사고수습본부 정례 브리핑 (2월 7일) (Daily briefing on COVID-19, February 7) 53 The updates of COVID-19(as of Feb.19) in Korea | Press Release | News Room : KCDC 7 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. .
As the number of patients grew rapidly, the KCDC decided to focus on more vulnerable groups. In their February 29, 2020 press release, the agency stated: "The KCDC has asked local government and health facilities to focus on tests and treatment, especially targeting those aged 65+ and those with underlying conditions who need early detection and treatment." This change was coded as our next testing regime change in the dataset. 54
On March 22, 2020, the KCDC began conducting COVID-19 diagnostic testing for every inbound traveler entering from Europe. This was coded as another testing regime change. Of the 1,442 inbound travelers from Europe arriving March 22, 2020, 152 were symptomatic and were quarantined and tested at an airport quarantine facility. The remaining 1,290 travelers were asymptomatic and were moved to a temporary living facility to be tested. 55
On March 27, 2020, this policy was expanded, where all inbound travellers from the US with symptoms (regardless of nationality) were required to be tested at the airport. We code this as our final testing 56 regime change. The data on the testing regime date changes are in the " KOR_policy_data_sources.csv ."
We have collated a regional and provincial level time series health outcome dataset in Italy from February 24, 2020 to April 7, 2020. This data came from the GitHub repository maintained by the Italian Department of Civil Protection ( Dipartimento della Protezione Civile ). Health outcomes included the number of confirmed cases, the number of deaths, the number of recoveries, and the number of active cases. These figures have been updating daily at 5 or 6 pm (Central European Time). The regional-level dataset was pulled directly from " dati-regioni/dpc-covid19-ita-regioni.csv, " and the provincial-level dataset was pulled from " dati-province/dpc-covid19-ita-province.csv. "
The testing regime change in Italy occurred when the Director of Higher Health Council announced on February 26, 2020 that COVID-19 testing would only be performed on symptomatic patients, as the majority of the previous tests performed were negative.
The data on the testing regime date changes are in the " ITA_policy_data_sources.csv ." is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . The Iranian government had been announcing its new daily number of COVID-19 confirmed cases at the provincial level on the Ministry of Health's website. This data has been compiled daily in the table "New COVID-19 cases in Iran by province" located in the "2020 coronavirus pandemic in Iran" article 57 on Wikipedia.
We spot-checked the data in the Wikipedia table against the Iranian Ministry of Health announcements using a combination of Google Translate and a comparison of the numbers in the 58 59 announcements (which were written in Persian script) to the Persian numbers.
Testing regime changes: On March 6, 2020, the Ministry of Health announced a national coronavirus plan, which included 60 contacting families by phone to identify potential cases, along with the disinfecting of public places.
The plan was to begin in the provinces of Qom, Gilan, and Isfahan, and then would be rolled out nationwide. On March 13, 2020, the government announced a military-enforced home isolation policy throughout the nation. This announcement included nationwide disinfecting of public places. While 61 a follow-up announcement of the March 6 high testing regime stating its complete rollout was not found, the March 13 announcement did reference the implementation of the public spaces component of the earlier plan across the country. We thus assumed that the high testing regime had also been fully rolled out on March 13, 2020.
The data on the testing regime date changes are in the " IRN_policy_data_sources.csv ."
We have collated a state-level time series health outcome dataset in the United States from January 22, 2020 to April 7, 2020.
The data come from the Github repository associated with the usafacts.org interactive dashboard. As of the time of writing, the data are available here . The repository and dashboard are updated essentially in real-time, at least daily.
To determine the testing regime, we used estimated daily counts of the cumulative number of tests conducted in every state, as aggregated by the largely crowdsourced effort named "The Covid Tracking Project" ( covidtracking.com ). We estimated the total number of tests as the sum of confirmed positive and negative cases. For some states and some days, there have been no negative case counts, in which case we utilize just the confirmed positive cases. We also ensured that the 57 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . confirmed number of positive cases agreed with the counts in the John Hopkins University COVID-19 ›4dataset. 62 We programmatically determined possible testing regime changes by filtering for any consecutive days during which the testing rate increased at least 250% from one day to the next, and where this jump was an increase of at least 150 total tests over one day. After visually inspecting the candidates, we confirmed that the automatically detecting testing regime changes represent visually distinguishable changes in testing rates. The testing regime date changes are encoded within the data cleaning script.
The policy events, datasets, and sources used in this paper are described below. For each country, the relevant country-specific policies identified were then mapped to a harmonized policy categorization used across all countries.
The policy categories are by default coded as binary variables, where " [policy_variable] " = 0 before the policy is implemented in that area, and " [policy_variable] " = 1 on the date the policy is implemented (and for all subsequent dates until the policy is lifted). There are instances when the value of the policy variable is between 0 and 1; for further details, refer to the Policy Intensity subsection.
The main policy categories identified across the six different countries fall into four broad classes:
1. Restricting travel: a. " travel_ban_local " : A policy that restricts people from entering or exiting the administrative area (e.g county or province) treated by the policy. b. " travel_ban_intl_in ": A policy that either bans foreigners from specific countries from entering the country, or requires travelers coming from abroad to self-isolate upon entering the country. c. " travel_ban_intl_out ": A policy that suspends international travel to specific foreign countries that have high levels of COVID-19 outbreak. d. " travel_ban_country_list ": A list of countries for which the national government has issued a travel ban or advisory. This information supplements the policy variable " travel_ban_intl_out. " e. " transit_suspension ": A policy that suspends any non-essential land-, rail-, or water-based passenger or freight transit. 2. Distancing through cancellation of events and suspension of educational/commercial/religious activities: a. " school_closure ": A policy that closes school and other educational services in that area.
62 CSSEGISandData/COVID-19: Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) Cases, provided by JHU CSSE 10 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . b. " business_closure ": A policy that closes offices, non-essential businesses, and non-essential commercial activities in that area. "Non-essential" services are defined by area. This policy also includes the limiting of business hours and reducing restaurant and bar operations.
c. " religious_closure" : A policy that prohibits gatherings at a place of worship, specifically targeting locations that are epicenters of the COVID-19 outbreak. See the section on Korean policy for more information on this policy variable. d. " work_from_home ": A policy that requires people to work remotely. This policy may also include encouraging workers to take holiday/paid time off. e. " event_cancel ": A policy that cancels a specific pre-scheduled large event (e.g. parade, sporting event, etc). This is different from prohibiting all events over a certain size. f. " no_gathering ": A policy that prohibits any type of public or private gathering.
(whether cultural, sporting, recreational, or religious). Depending on the country, the policy can prohibit a gathering above a certain size, in which case the number of people is specified by the " no_gathering_size " variable. g. " no_gathering_inside ": A policy that specifically prohibits indoor gatherings. See the section on French policy for more information on this policy variable. h. " no_demonstration ": A policy that prohibits protest-specific gatherings. See the section on Korean policy for more information on this policy variable. i. " social_distance ": A policy that encourages people to maintain a safety distance (often between one to two meters) from others. This policy differs by country, but includes other policies that close cultural institutions (e.g. museums or libraries), or encourage establishments to reduce density. j. "welfare_services_closure" : A policy that mandates the closure of social welfare facilities, specifically mental rehabilitation facilities, social welfare centers, and homeless use facilities. See the section on Korean policy for more information on this policy variable.
3. Quarantine and lockdown: a. " pos_cases_quarantine ": A policy that mandates that people who have tested positive for COVID-19, or subject to quarantine measures, have to confine themselves at home. The policy can also include encouraging people who have fevers or respiratory symptoms to stay at home, regardless of whether they tested positive or not. b. " home_isolation ": A policy that prohibits people from leaving their home regardless of their testing status. For some countries, the policy can also include the case when people have to stay at home, but are allowed to leave for work-or health-related purposes. 4. Additional policies a. " emergency_declaration ": A decision made at the city/municipality, county, state/provincial, or federal level to declare a state of emergency. This allows the affected area to marshal emergency funds and resources as well as activate emergency legislation.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . b. " paid_sick_leave ": A policy where employees receive pay while they are not working due to the illness.
Optional policies:
In the cases when the aforementioned policies are optional, we denote this as " [policy_variable]_opt. "
Population weighting of policy variables:
In cases where only a portion of the administrative unit (e.g. half of the counties within the state) are affected by the implementation of the policy, we weight the policy variable by the percentage of population within the administrative unit that is treated by the policy. This is denoted as " [policy_variable]_popwt, " and the value that this variable can take on is a continuous number between 0 and 1. Sources for the population data are detailed in a later section.
" policy_intensity " is a continuous value between 0 and 1 that modulates the intensity/restrictiveness of a policy. By default this value is 0 when the policy has not been implemented and 1 when the policy is implemented (i.e. the policy variables are treated as indicator variables). However, in instances when a policy has evolved over time, then earlier (less restrictive) implementations of the policy are weighted by a " policy_intensity " value that is between 0 and 1, and the most recent (more restrictive) version of the policy has a value of 1.
For simplicity, if a given policy has undergone one version change, then the " policy_intensity " of the first edition is equal to 0.5, and the value of the second edition is equal to 1. If there have been two version changes, then the " policy_intensity " of the first edition is equal to 0.33, the value of the second edition is equal to 0.67, and the value of the last edition is equal to 1, etc.
We compute ' policy_intensity ' using this approach:
1. For non population-weighted policy variables: For a given policy category on a specific date (e.g. " business_closure " on March 15, 2020), take the maximum of the mandatory policy intensities for all units lower (e.g. Adm0) than, equal to, and higher (e.g. Adm2) than the analysis unit (e.g. Adm1). Assign this maximum " policy_intensity " value to the unit of analysis. If there is no mandatory version of the policy that applies to the unit of analysis, then take the maximum of the optional policy intensities and assign it to the optional policy variable for the analysis unit. 2. For population-weighted policy variables: Take the maximum of the mandatory policy intensities for all units lower (e.g. Adm0) than and equal to the analysis unit (e.g. Adm1), and assign that as the default mandatory intensity for all units higher (e.g. Adm2). If the policy is not mandatory at the analysis or lower unit, then assign the maximum of the optional " policy_intensity " value as the default optional intensity for all higher units. For any higher unit that has a specific policy, assign the appropriate version (mandatory or optional) of the policy 12 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . variable at that higher unit the maximum of that intensity and the default intensity, with mandatory always taking priority over optional. For all that don't have a specific policy, assign them the default intensity (again, assigning this to the optional or mandatory version as appropriate). Then calculate the population-weighting at the analysis unit level (e.g. Adm1), separately for both optional and mandatory variables. Each higher unit should only have a non-zero intensity for optional or for mandatory (or neither), but not both. 3. For broadly defined policy variables like " social_distance " that could encompass a variety of country-specific policies: The " policy_intensity " assignment differs by country. If the specific policies employed at the various administrative levels are the same policy, then the approach in (1) is used. If they are different policies within the same broad category, then we add instead of taking the maximum, allow for both optional and mandatory policies, and and otherwise follow the approach of (1). This addition is appropriate across different administrative divisions because of (1). If some policies are the same and some are different, we use a combination of addition and taking the maximum over the " policy_intensity " values. For instances when we add the " policy_intensity " values, once the processed dataset has been constructed and formatted, the last step is to normalize each variable such that it takes values between 0 and 1 (e.g. if the maximum from addition of sub-policies is 1.4, divide that entire column by 1.4). This standardization should again be done separately for each mandatory and optional version of each policy.
We obtain data on China's policy response to the COVID-19 pandemic by culling data on the start dates of travel bans and lockdowns at the city-level from the "2020 Hubei lockdowns" Wikipedia page, the Wuhan Coronavirus Timeline project on Github, and various news reports.
To combat the spread of COVID-19, the Chinese government imposed travel restrictions and quarantine measures, starting with the lockdown of the city of Wuhan, the origin of the pandemic, on January 23, 2020. Immediately following the Wuhan lockdown, neighboring cities followed suit, banning travel into and out of their borders, shutting down businesses, and placing residents under household quarantine. The same policy measures were implemented in cities across China for the next three weeks.
Some lockdowns occurred during the national Chinese New Year holiday (January 24-30, 2020) when schools and most workers were on break. On January 27, 2020, China extended the official holiday to February 2, 2020, while many additional provinces delayed resuming work and opening schools for even longer. The Chinese New Year holiday is analogous to containment policies such as school 65 closures and restrictions on non-essential work. We do not specifically estimate the effect of this holiday extension, as most cities were in lockdown during the extended holiday, and a lockdown is a 63 2020 Hubei lockdowns 64 Pratitya/wuhan2020-timeline: 以社会学年鉴模式体例规范地统编自2019年12月起武汉新冠肺炎疫情进展的时间线 (The timeline of COVID-19 events since December 2019) 65 China Extends Lunar New Year Holiday to Feb 2, Shanghai to Feb 9
13 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . more restrictive containment measure. A lockdown requires all residents to stay home, except for medical reasons or essential work, and only allows one person from each household to go outside once every one to five days (exact policy varied by city).
We obtain data on France's policy response to the COVID-19 pandemic from the French government website, press releases from each regional public health site, and Wikipedia.
The French government website contains a timeline of all national policy measures. Each regional 66 public health agency ( l'Agence Régionale de Santé ) in France posts press releases with information on the policies the région or départements within the région will implement to mitigate the spread and impact of the COVID-19 outbreak. The Wikipedia page on the 2020 coronavirus pandemic in France 67 has collated information on the major policy measures taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. 68
Starting February 29, 2020, France banned mass gatherings of more than 5,000 people nationwide, while some major sporting events were cancelled and a handful of schools closed to mitigate the spread of the virus. As more COVID-19 cases were confirmed during the following week, additional sporting events were canceled, more schools decided to close, and certain cities and départements limited mass gatherings to no more than 50 people, excluding shops, business, restaurants, bars, weddings, and funerals. Some régions closed early childhood establishments (e.g. nurseries, daycare centers) and prohibited visitors to elderly care facilities. On March 8, 2020, France banned mass gatherings of more than 1,000 people nationwide. Other schools, cities, and départements followed suit with additional school closures and limiting mass gatherings. On March 11, 2020, France prohibited all visits to elder care establishments. Starting March 16, 2020, France closed all schools nationwide. Between March 17, 2020 -March 23, 2020, governments at both the national level and région level implemented more restrictive lockdown policies, which included shelter-in-place measures, the closing of public places, and banning of outside markets and severely restricting 69 70 movement outside of the house. 71 We have coded various policies that cancel events and large gatherings as such: any cancellations of professional sporting and other specific pre-scheduled events as the policy variable " event_cancel ."
The " no_gathering " policy variable represents policy measures that banned all events or mass gatherings of a certain size, e.g. no gatherings of over 1,000 people. The " social_distance " policy variable includes measures preventing visits to elder care establishments, closures of public pools and tourist attractions, and teleworking plans for workers.
We obtained data on South Korea's policy response to the COVID-19 pandemic from various news sources, as well as press releases from the Korean Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (KCDC), the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and local governments' websites. The policy variables coded in the dataset are: " welfare_services_closure, " " business_closure_opt, " " emergency_declaration, " " no_demonstration, " " religious_closure ," " event_cancel, " " school_closure, " " social_distance_opt, " " travel_ban_intl_in_opt, " " travel_ban_intl_out_opt, ", " work_from_home_opt, and pos_cases_quarantine ".
On February 28 2020, the KCDC recommended the closure of 14 types of social welfare facilities to reduce the spread of infection among vulnerable groups in the population. These include childcare 72 centers, vocational rehabilitation centers for the disabled, senior citizen centers, mental rehabilitation facilities, and homeless use facilities. We code this in t he variable " welfare_services_closure ". Even though it was technically a recommendation, we did not code this policy as optional because a majority of facility types listed in the press release (senior citizen centers, job centers, childcare centers, etc.) are under public administration, so these facilities likely would have followed recommendations. Indeed, some news articles have reported that all children's centers in Busan are closed as well as over 3,600 facilities in Seoul.
We created another variable, " business_closure_opt ", which applies to two provinces: Seoul and Gyeonggi-do. On March 11, 2020, the mayor of Seoul advised that popular commercial establishments such as karaoke places, clubs, and cyber cafes be closed. Seven days later, the governor of 75 Gyeonggi-do issued an executive order limiting the usage of commonly frequented commercial establishments and requiring a higher standard of cleanliness. We coded this as an optional business 76 closure given that the policy discourages usage of these facilities but did not explicitly order them to shut down.
Daegu and Gyeongsangbuk-do have been two of the regions hardest hit by COVID-19. The government of South Korea declared an emergency for those two areas on March 15, 2020. We incorporated this 77 information into the variable " emergency_declaration ."
The variable " no_demonstration " reflects the efforts of some regions limiting any protests calling for slowing the spread of the outbreak. On February 24, 2020, Incheon stopped a protest in front of the 72 코로나19 여파 "사회복지 이용시설 휴관 권고" (Social welfare facilities recommended to shut down) 73 부산 지역아동센터 모두 휴관…더 외로운 저소득층 아이들 (Busan child-care facilities shut down -worse for the lower-income children) 74 15 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . Incheon Metropolitan City Hall. Two days later, Seoul prohibited protests in downtown areas where 78 massive demonstrations used to take place. 79 Many province level COVID-19 policies have targeted religious gatherings at Shincheonji Church of Jesus, since its religious gatherings have been linked to the explosion in the number of cumulative confirmed cases. Provincial governments tried to shut down Shincheonji-related places of worship, and the related policy implementation is encoded in the variable " religious_closure ." The regions which utilized this policy option are: Daegu, Gyeongsangbuk-do, Seoul, Jeju, Gyeonggi-do, 80 81 82 83 84 Jeollanam-do, Gyeongsangnam-do, Incheon, Ulsan, Busan, Jeollabuk-do, 85 Chungcheongbuk-do, Gwangju, Chungcheongnam-do, and Daejeon. 91 92 93 94 Many provinces have also canceled public events organized by local administrative agencies . We code this policy in the variable " event_cancel ". The regions which exercised this policy are: Seoul , Daegu , 95 96 This restriction was not limited to inbound travellers. The government also issued advisories on countries where the number of infections had increased, which has been encoded as the variable " travel_ban_intl_out_opt ." The first outbound travel alert due to COVID-19 was announced on January 28, 2020: The Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MOFA) issued a Level 2 (Yellow) alert for any travel to mainland China, Hong Kong, and Macau. Later, MOFA added Italy on February 28, 2020, Japan on 121 122
March 9, 2020, and all European countries on March 16, 2020. On March 18, 2020, KCDC strongly 123 124 called for the cancellation or delay of all international travel on non-urgent matters. It should be 125 noted that the Level 2 alert does not enable the government to prohibit travel to these destinations, which is why the policy was coded as "optional."
There are four types of travel advisories distributed by the South Korean government: Level 1, Navy; Level 2, Yellow; Level 3, Red; and Level 4, Black. Travel under the Level 4 alert is prohibited, and the 126 government utilizes legal instruments to enforce the restriction. If people leave the country under the black alert, they will be subject to fines up to ten million KRW, or imprisonment up to a year. However, there is no enforcement instrument for the advisories up to Level 3. In that sense, we stated above that the banning policy does not mean prohibiting travel. Nevertheless, we coded the yellow alert as the first travel ban in our dataset, since Level 2 alerts are issued relatively rarely, such as during a significant demonstration or military coup. As a result, we coded the Level 2 alert due to COVID-19 127 128
into the dataset for the policy analysis.
The policy variable " work_from_home_optional " indicates when KCDC began recommending that people work from home. On March 15, 2020, the KCDC press release stated: "Since contact with confirmed cases in an enclosed space increases the possibility of transmission, it is recommended to work at home or adjust desk locations so as to keep a certain distance among people in the office. More detailed guidelines for local governments and high-risk working environments will be distributed soon." 129
On March 22, 2020, the KCDC announced that all inbound travelers from Europe would be tested at the airport and subject to quarantine measures. Korean citizens and long-term visitors returning 130 from abroad needed to home-quarantine for 14 days (even if they test negative for COVID-19), while short-term visitors would be actively monitored. Inbound travelers with no symptoms were required to stay at temporary facilities while awaiting their test results. We coded this as the policy variable March 27, 2020 to include all symptomatic travelers arriving from the US, we coded this variable 132 with a " policy_intensity " = 0.5. On April 1, 2020, these quarantine measures were extended to include inbound travelers arriving from all countries, with exceptions allowed only for limited cases (diplomatic missions etc.). This variable was then coded with " policy_intensity " = 0.75. Lastly, 133 starting on April 5, 2020, the KCDC announced that inbound travelers who fail to comply with quarantine regulations are subject to imprisonment of up to 1 year or a fine of up to 10 million won for the violation of the Infectious Disease Control and Prevention Act. In addition, persons of foreign nationality who fail to comply may be subject to measures including deportation and entry ban in accordance with the Immigration Act. We then coded this variable with the " policy_intensity " = 1. 134 
We have obtained data on Italy's policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic primarily from the English version of the COVID-19 dossier "Chronology of main steps and legal acts taken by the Italian Government for the containment of the COVID-19 epidemiological emergency" written by the 135 Department of Civil Protection ( Dipartimento della Protezione Civile ), most recently updated on March 12, 2020. This dossier details the majority of the municipal, regional, provincial, and national policies rolled out between the start of the pandemic to present-day. We have supplemented these policy events with news articles that detail which administrative areas were specifically impacted by the additional policies.
The first major policy rollout was on February 23, 2020, when 11 municipalities across two provinces in Northern Italy were placed on lockdown. These policies included closing schools, cancelling public and private events and gatherings, closing museums and other cultural institutions, closing non-essential commercial activities, and prohibiting the movement of people into or out of the municipalities.
The second major policy rollout was on March 1, 2020, when two provinces and three regions in Northern Italy were placed on partial lockdown. These policies also included closing schools, cancelling public and private events and gatherings, closing museums, closing non-essential commercial activities, as well as limiting the number of people at places of worship, restricting operating hours of bars and restaurants, and encouraging people to work remotely.
The third major policy roll-out was on March 5, 2020, when all schools across the country were closed. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . private events and gatherings, closing of museums, encouraging people to work remotely, limiting the number of people at places of worship, restricting opening hours of bars and restaurants, mandating quarantine of people who tested positive for COVID-19, prohibiting the movement of people into or out of the affected area, and restricting movement within the affected area to only work or health-related purposes. Commercial activities were still allowed, as long as they maintained a safety distance of one meter apart per person within the establishment. All civil and religious ceremonies, including weddings and funerals, were suspended. During this same policy roll-out, the rest of the country faced less stringent policies: cancelling public and private events, closing museums, and requiring restaurants and commercial establishments to maintain a safety distance of one meter apart per person within the establishment.
The fifth major policy roll-out was announced on March 9, 2020, and went into effect on March 10, 2020, when lockdown policies applied to Northern Italy were rolled out to the entire country. Lastly, on March 11, 2020, the lockdown was changed to also cover the closing of any non-essential businesses and further restricted people from leaving their home.
After the death toll in Italy surpassed that of China on March 21, 2020, the Italian government increased the severity of their existing policies. Effective March 22, 2020, all non-essential industrial production and factories would be shut down across the country. Domestic travel was further 136 restricted; people were not permitted to leave the municipality they were currently in except for urgent matters or emergencies. Lastly, in the hard-hit northern region of Lombardy, the regional 137 government increased lockdown restrictions by banning all individual outdoor exercise or sporting activity. 138
Policy Intensity : We have modified the policy intensity of three different policy variables: "home_isolation ," " business_closure, " and " travel_ban_local ."
The " home_isolation " policy underwent three policy revisions:
1. The least restrictive version of the policy applies to when people were allowed to leave the house for work, health, and essential reasons (" policy_intensity " of " home_isolation " = 0.33). 2. The moderate version of the policy applies to when people were allowed to leave the house only for health and essential reasons (which includes the ability to go outdoors for individual exercise/sporting activities) (" policy_intensity " of " home_isolation " = 0.67). 3. The most restrictive version of the policy applies to when people were allowed to leave the house only for health and essential reasons, but were no longer allowed to leave the house for individual exercise/sporting activities (" policy_intensity " of " home_isolation " = 1).
The " business_closure " policy underwent three policy revisions: 1. The least restrictive version of the policy applies to the limiting of restaurant hours (but other commercial activities were permitted) (" policy_intensity " of " business_closure " = 0.33), . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. .
2. the moderate version of the policy applies to the closing of all non-essential businesses, (" policy_intensity " of " business_closure " = 0.67), 3. and the most restrictive version of the policy applies to the closing of all non-essential industrial production and factories, in addition to the closing of non-essential businesses (" policy_intensity " of " business_closure " = 1).
Lastly, the " travel_ban_local " policy underwent two policy revisions: 1. The least restrictive version of the policy applies to when people were not allowed to enter/exit the affected administrative area, (" policy_intensity " of " travel_ban_local " = 0.5), 2. and the most restrictive version of the policy applies to a more restrictive ban on domestic travel that mandated that people had to stay in the municipality they were currently in (" policy_intensity " of " travel_ban_local " = 1).
For Iran's policy response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we relied on news media reporting as the primary source of policy information (mostly due to translation restrictions). We also relied on two timelines of pandemic events in Iran to help guide the policy search. 139 140
The first major outbreak in Iran was connected to a major Shia pilgrimage in the city of Qom that brought Shiite pilgrims from Iran and throughout the Middle East, where they came to kiss the Fatima Masumeh shrine. It is possible that the disease was brought to Qom by a merchant traveling from Wuhan, China. In addition, it is believed that the Iranian government knew of the COVID-19 outbreak 141 prior to its February 21, 2020 parliamentary elections, but downplayed the risks associated with the disease as not to suppress voter turnout (given concerns that a low turnout would reflect poorly on its legitimacy). The disease, initially centered in Qom and neighboring Tehran, spread rapidly 142 throughout the country.
As the number of cases grew, the Iranian government started to increase the stringency of its response. The first case was reported on February 19, 2020 (two individuals who both were reported to have died that day). The next day, school closures were announced in the province of Qom and travel in the region was discouraged. By February 22, 2020 the government closed schools in 14 provinces and closed down major gathering sites such as football matches and theaters. By March 5, 2020 schools were closed nationwide and government employees were required to work from home. Home isolation was implemented by the military on March 13, 2020, which the media described as "the near-curfew follows growing exasperation among MPs that calls for Iranian citizens to stay at home had been widely ignored, as people continued to travel before the Nowruz New Year holidays." There have been a wide range in responses across states since the first case of COVID-19 was announced in Washington State on January 14, 2020. As a result, the CDC began releasing guidance to those at risk of being exposed to the virus. The initial recommendations included travel warnings for specific countries with confirmed cases and sustained COVID-19 spread. Over the course of our dataset, these warnings increased in intensity, changing from warning against inbound and outbound travel to specific countries in both Europe and Asia to warning against travel at all. International 148 travel restrictions were coded as " travel_ban_int_out " for outbound travel, and " travel_ban_int_in " for inbound travel, with lists of the places to and from which travel was restricted also included. On March 31, 2020, the US changed its global travel warning to Level 4, the highest warning level, which the US Department of State defines as avoiding "all international travel due to the global impact of COVID-19." In addition to the national travel restrictions, individual states also implemented local 149 travel bans, coded as " travel_ban_local " as the spread continued to grow, such that anyone entering specific states in which this policy was in effect were required to self-quarantine for 14 days. This ultimately reflected the national policy as well, in that people could still technically travel under a Level 4 warning, but upon arrival to the US, they would be put in a mandatory quarantine for 14 days.
In addition to travel restrictions, as COVID-19 prevalence increased in the world and within the US borders, the CDC began to release additional guidance for healthcare workers, individuals at higher 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.22.20040642 doi: medRxiv preprint risk, as well as for state-level action (e.g. travel or social distancing policies). These policies have 150 largely been implemented at the state-level rather than at the national level. Social distancing policies, coded as " social_distance " have either recommended or mandated that individuals avoid crowds, stay home as much as possible, delay elective medical procedures, limit or avoid visiting vulnerable populations (such as long-term care facilities or prison facilities), wear masks when outside the home, and stand at least six feet away from others in public spaces. The " social_distance " policy category also encompasses the closing of government offices and other public facilities such as libraries or museums.
Along the same line of social distance policies, a separate variable was 151 152 coded as " no_gathering " to represent policy measures that banned all events or mass gatherings of a certain size, i.e. no gatherings over a certain number of people (where this number has varied by region).
In addition to social distancing, many governors have mandated statewide school closures at the private and public K-12 and higher education levels, while others have left it up to each school district to decide. School closures have been coded as "school_closure" and once implemented, have been 153 "turned on" for the remainder of our time series, as no schools have reopened since these policies have been implemented.
Business closures, coded as "business_closure," have also been recommended or mandated at the state level. These policies have ranged from shutting down all non-essential businesses, reducing the number of hours a business may be in operation, severely restricting the number of customers that are allowed inside at one time, to prohibiting customers to enter a business, such as in the case of bars and restaurants, where they were only allowed to operate or take-out and delivery services. When business closures have involved shutting down all non-essential operations, "essential" has been defined by each state but is largely similar between states, generally defining essential as food or healthcare providers, as well as basic government operations (i.e. trash collection, mail, water monitoring, etc). To support employees working remotely or staying home when sick, a number of states have also mandated paid sick leave for those who are affected by COVID-19, which has been coded as "paid_sick_leave." There is a separate "work_from_home" category that includes measures that require businesses to allow employees to telework, if possible, such that no workers except for those who have essential functions are allowed to work in an office.
At the subnational level, many governors have implemented a statewide mandatory shelter-in-place policy, requiring all individuals to self-isolate within their home or place of residence and limit outdoor activity to essential functions only, which is defined by each state. Shelter-in-place laws have been coded as " home_isolation ," and generally are enacted alongside a number of other policies, including business closures, local travel bans, more restrictive gathering sizes, and enforceable social distance rules. Again similar to business closures, the definition of "essential function" has been 150 23 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . updated in subsequent policy editions to be more detailed and often stricter, allowing for less activity out of the home. 154 We coded various policies that cancel events and large gatherings as " event_cancel ", which is only used when one specific event/gathering is cancelled, for example an election postponement, rather than any event over a certain size, which would instead be coded with the " no_gathering " variable. The " emergency_declaration " variable encompasses all declarations made indicating a "state of emergency" at the city, county, state, and federal level. This declaration allows the affected area to immediately marshal emergency funds and resources and activate emergency legislation, while also giving the public an indication of the gravity of the situation.
Policy Intensity :
Policy intensity was coded to ensure consistency within the state level for US policy variables as opposed to within the national level as was the case for other countries in our dataset. I n the US, policies have largely been enacted and enforced by state governments, with variability between states' versions of the same policy type as well as the timing of implementation. As a result, we code policy intensity based on the number of editions of the same policy within a state. To demonstrate, we include an example of how we code two different states' implementing the same policy type below:
• On 3/9/20, 3/16/20, and 3/26/20: Connecticut enacted three editions of the " no_gathering " policy, restricting public gathering to no more than 250, 50, and 5 people, respectively. • On 3/11/20: Florida enacted a " no_gathering " policy restricting public gathering to no more than 1,000 people. This is the first and only edition of the "no_gathering" policy in Florida.
Thus, Connecticut and Florida's policy intensities are assigned based only on the number of editions within each of the states rather than comparing the details of the policy between the states (i.e., the number of people allowed to gather). Florida's " no_gathering " policy would therefore be assigned an intensity of 1 since there is only one edition, while Connecticut's three editions of the " no_gathering " policy would be assigned intensities of 0.33, 0.67, and 1, respectively. We feel that assigning policy intensity within a state allows us to better capture the context within which a policy is enacted, for example due to different COVID-19 case loads or variation in population density, which may play a significant role in determining the details and timing of a policy.
In order to construct population weighted policy variables and to determine the susceptible fraction of the population for disease projections under the realized and the no-policy counterfactual scenarios, we obtained the most recent estimates of population for each administrative unit included in our analysis. The sources of that population data are documented below. 154 NYT Article | "See Which States and Cities Have Told Residents to Stay at Home" 24 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.22.20040642 doi: medRxiv preprint China City-level population data have been extracted from a compiled dataset of the 2010 Chinese City Statistical Yearbooks. We matched the city level population dataset to the city level COVID-19 epidemiology dataset. As the two datasets use slightly different administrative divisions, we only matched 295 cities that exist in both datasets, and grouped the remaining 39 cities in our compiled epidemiology dataset into "other" for prediction purposes. Cities grouped into "other" because of mismatches have a total population of 114,000,000, or 8.5% of the total population in China.
For these 39 cities that we could not match, we imputed the population by taking the total remaining population (114,000,000) and divided it evenly between these remaining cities. We flag the imputed populations by using the binary variable " pop_is_imputed." France Département -level populations are obtained from the National Institute of Statistics and Economic database. We used the most up to date estimation of the population in France as of January 2020. 155 
We downloaded the number of population by provinces from a webpage administered by the Korean Statistical Information Service (KOSIS). The government agency recently updated the population 156 information of February, 2020, which we used for our analysis.
Region and province level population data come from the Italian National Institute of Statistics (Istat), estimating total population on January 1, 2019. The datasets for all Italian regions and provinces are scraped from Istat's website in get_adm_info.ipynb .
Province level population data for Iran comes from the 2016 Census, as listed on the City Population website. It is scraped in get_adm_info.ipynb .
In addition, the use of an SIR framework may misrepresent the true underlying disease dynamics, and a more general SEIR framework, which includes representation of people exposed to the infection without yet being infectious, may produce more realistic simulations of cases averted/delayed by policy. We also test sensitivity to the use of the SEIR framework, as well as a key parameter in this alternative framework -the assumed rate of transition from exposed to infectious ( σ ).
We replicate the simulation underlying Figure 4 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . framework we employ in the main simulation. We present our estimates of the total number of cases under both the no-policy and policy scenarios, as well as the total number of cases averted/delayed by policy. We sum simulated cases across all countries on the last dates of the countries' respective samples. Note that the simulation uses the growth rates derived from our empirical model such that changes in γ and σ correspond to changes in the transmission rate β . β must vary with γ and σ as our data determine the underlying exponential growth rate. We show the results of this sensitivity analysis in Extended Data Figure 7 . Panels ( a ) and ( b ) respectively show the simulated number of cases in the no-policy and with-policy scenarios. The number of simulated no-policy cases is decreasing in γ for high σ and increasing in γ for low σ . The number of simulated no-policy cases is increasing in σ for low γ and nonmonotonic in σ for high γ . The number of simulated with-policy cases is increasing in γ and decreasing in σ . Panel ( c ) shows the number of cases averted due to policy and demonstrates that varying σ or γ can reduce our estimate of cases averted on the order of several million reported cases (up to 10%). Panel ( c ) shows that higher values of γ produce lower estimates of cases averted for the SIR model ( σ = ∞), but increasing estimates of cases averted for the lower values of σ . Panel ( d ) plots the content of Panel ( c ) on the log scale used in Figure 4 of the main text for comparison. For our simulation value of γ , decreasing σ decreases our estimate of cases averted.
Overall, these results show that the basic order of magnitude of the number of cases averted is preserved within this reasonable range of potential γ values in the SIR framework and σ values in the SEIR framework.
The model we use to estimate the impacts of policy on growth rates assumes exponential growth, which is typically valid for early-stage disease outbreaks. If growth is not exponential, there exists the potential for bias in estimated coefficients. There are three primary reasons why an early-stage outbreak could exhibit non-exponential growth in the absence of policy intervention:
1. The infection spread may progress quickly, lowering the susceptible fraction of the population to a degree that materially affects the infection spread, transitioning the outbreak away from the exponential "early stage" regime.
2. In a disease with a substantial latent period, the growth of infections is only asymptotically exponential. At any given moment in time, the instantaneous growth rate may differ from a 160 steady-state exponential growth rate.
3. When analyzing growth in cumulative infections, as we do for countries where active infection data are unavailable, growth is similarly only asymptotically exponential. 160 Estimating epidemic exponential growth rate and basic reproduction number 27 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. .
In our dataset, 95% of administrative units have susceptible fractions above 0.93 on their last analysis day and all have susceptible fractions above 0.78, indicating that the first reason is unlikely to induce substantial bias in our results. When the transmission rate of a disease declines due to anti-contagion policy, the growth rate in infections decreases with a lag due to the dynamics associated with the latent period. Because of this, exponential models estimating the average treatment effect (ATE) of a policy may underestimate the true reduction seen from a policy because they include days in which the growth rate was still higher than the new steady state growth rate. Finally, in the early stages of an outbreak, the number of active cases will dominate the number of recovered/deceased patients and thus the differences in growth of active and cumulative cases is likely to be small.
To test the robustness of our regression approach, we construct simulated outbreaks in which we control demographic, policy, and epidemiological parameters. We then use a variant of the regression model (Eq. 7) from the main text to estimate the no-policy growth rates and the effects of each policy. In this simulation, we do not include any fixed effects to control for day-of-week (δ) and changing testing regime (μ) effects. These variables are not simulated as these are primarily measurement controls and their effects would be directly absorbed by the corresponding regression parameters if simulated. We compare the coefficient estimates to the "true" values used in the simulation.
To capture the impact of disease latency, we use an SEIR model framework to generate synthetic outbreaks. We simulate 12,000 45-day outbreaks at hourly timesteps, starting with a no-policy exponential growth rate of 0.4 (similar to those estimated in our main analysis) and a single exposed individual. We adjust this asymptotic exponential growth rate to account for three synthetic policies that turn on at random times, each with a known effect (-0.05, -0.1, and -0.2). For each subset of 1,000 simulations, we use one of four plausible values for the mean latency period, σ -1 (0, 2, 3, and 5 days), and one of three plausible values for the mean infectious period, γ -1 (3, 5, and 20 days). We choose a wide range of these variables due to substantial uncertainty over the epidemiological characteristics of the novel coronavirus, and a nonexistent latency period is included for comparison to an SIR-like 161 data generating process. The mean transmission rate per infected person per day, β, is derived from the asymptotic growth rate, the mean latency period, and the mean infection period by solving for the eigenvalues of a SEIR system, which yields:
We apply exponential noise to β for each simulation and at each timestep, and contribute additional gaussian noise to σ and γ (standard deviations of 0.01 and 0.03, respectively). We add additional gaussian "measurement noise" to the instantaneous growth rates after simulation but before running our regression (standard deviation of 0.1). Cumulatively, this results in an average root-mean-squared-error (RMSE) in regressions across all 12,000 simulations of ~0.11, which matches the RMSE of daily growth rate values across all six countries in our main analysis.
The dynamic model outputs a time series of susceptible (S), exposed (E), infectious (I), and removed (R) individuals, as a fraction of the total population. We use both I and I+R as the left-hand-side 161 MIDAS Network Online COVID-19 Portal: Parameter Estimates 162 Estimating epidemic exponential growth rate and basic reproduction number 28 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . variables in our regression framework. The former corresponds to the analysis we run for countries in which we observe active cases and the latter to countries in which we observe only cumulative cases. We assume the majority of the "exposed but not infectious" population will not yet have been tested and will not appear in any of the datasets used in the main analysis. Our right-hand-side variables consist of the binary policy variables, allowing only for contemporaneous effects. This matches our main specification for all countries except China (where data availability allows for the estimate of lagged effects) and provides the most challenging environment in which to estimate the effect of policy in a dynamic system. Figures 8 and 9 . While it is possible to simulate outbreaks consisting of innumerable parameter combinations and noise distributions, we display those that seem most relevant for evaluating the robustness of our main analysis. Our associated GitHub repository contains a Jupyter notebook for readers to further examine the effect of simulation configurations on regression model robustness. Because the growth rate prior to policy has likely approached its asymptotic rate by the time we begin our regressions, variance in our no-policy growth rate estimates comes from noise in the disease parameters and measurement. The ability to recover unbiased estimates of this value has important implications for our estimate of the total number of cases averted/delayed to date, as this number is primarily driven by the counterfactual number of cases we would expect to see in a world in which no anti-contagion policy was enacted. Figure 9 demonstrates that our model recovers unbiased estimates of the cumulative effect for a disease with very short latency. As the latency period increases, the model begins to slightly underestimate the true effect of policy (i.e. it predicts a less negative value), due to the decay time over which a shock to transmission rate propagates to a new steady-state growth rate. The underestimate is reduced in situations where we are able to directly observe active infections and is increased when we can only observe cumulative infections. Note that statistical uncertainty in these estimated parameters dominates potential biases, even in "worst case" data conditions.
We conclude that biases (due to the use of an exponential model) in our estimates of the no-policy growth rate are essentially zero and are likely to be small and negative for our estimates of policy 29 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . effectiveness. If present in the data, such biases would cause us to modestly understate the effectiveness of anti-contagion policies.
Existing evidence has not demonstrated whether policies should affect infection growth rates in the days immediately following deployment. It is therefore not clear ex ante whether the policy variables in Eq. 7 should be encoded as "on" immediately following a policy deployment. As a robustness check, we estimate "fixed-lag" models in which a fixed delay between a policy's deployment and its effect is assumed. Specifically, we assume that policies cannot influence infection growth rates for L days, recoding a policy variable at time t as zero if a policy was implemented fewer than L days before t . We re-estimate Equation (7) for each value of L and present results in Extended Data Figure 5 and Supplementary Table 5 . If a delay model is more consistent with real world infection dynamics, these fixed lag models should recover larger estimates for the impact of policies and exhibit better model fit. Figure 5 displays the associated with each country-level fixed lag model R 2 with fixed lag lengths ranging from no fixed lags up to a 15 day fixed lag. In-sample fit generally declines or remains unchanged if policies are assumed to have a delay longer than 4 days. Panel c of Extended Data Figure 5 plots the estimated effects for no lag (the model reported in the main text) and for fixed-lags between one and five days. Estimates generally are unchanged or shrink towards zero (e.g. Home isolation in Iran), consistent with mis-coding of post-policy days as no-policy days.
In Supplementary Table 5 , we show our estimates of the effect of all policy interventions in each country (analogous to the average difference between red and blue markers in Figure 3 of the main text) using a fixed lag of up to 5 days. The estimated effects are broadly consistent across different lag lengths; however, the magnitude of the effect size declines slightly with increasing lag lengths. If policies take several days to impact infection growth rates, we would expect effect sizes to increase rather than decrease with lag lengths. Our finding of declining effect sizes is more consistent with contamination of the "control" group, where policies are incorrectly encoded as zeros after they have been deployed.
To ensure that the estimates from our regression model are robust to the withholding of data, we re-estimate our main model number of times for each country, where is the number of first level k c k c administrative units ("Adm1," i.e. state or province) in country c.
In each of the regressions for k c country c , we withhold data from one Adm1 unit when we estimate the effects of policy interventions on growth rates. The results of this exercise are displayed in Extended Data Figures 3 and 4. 30 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. 
In our main regression model, due to the limited length of our time series data and instances where multiple policies are deployed on the same date, we group certain policy interventions together. We group policies together that have similar objectives (e.g. " travel_ban_local " and " transit_suspension " would be one group, " event_cancel " and " no_gathering " would be another) and keep certain policies separate (i.e. " business_closure ," " school_closure ," " home_isolation ") where possible.
To test the sensitivity of our results to the grouping of policy interventions, we also estimate a model where the policies are estimated without grouping. Extended Data Figure 6 panel a shows the estimated infection growth rates and no-policy counterfactual growth rates using the model with disaggregated policies. Additionally, in Supplementary Table 4 , we compare the effect of policy interventions in each country when the effect of all policies are estimated separately ("Disaggregated Model") and when they are grouped into policy packages as in our preferred specification ("Main Specification"). We find the estimated impact of policy interventions on case growth rates is robust to this alternative specification.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. This table reports the policy data that have been collected at various levels of administrative divisions in each country. "Adm0" represents the country level, and higher "Adm*" numbers indicate smaller administrative subdivisions, which are specific to each country. Each policy is counted at the highest resolution administrative unit in which the policy is applied differentially. For example, if a country has ten regions at the "Adm1" level, and a policy is applied across five of those regions, the policy is counted as five separate "Adm1" policies rather than a single "Adm0" policy. National policies are counted only once as "Adm0."
32 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. This regression includes province fixed effects, day-of-week fixed effects, and clustered standard errors at the day level. "Social distance (optional)" includes recommended policies related to social distancing, e.g. no gathering, work from home, and closing businesses such as karaoke and cyber cafes. "Social distance (mandatory)" includes prohibiting rallies, closing churches, and closing welfare service facilities.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. This regression includes province fixed effects, day-of-week fixed effects, and clustered standard errors at the day level. "Other social distance" includes policies for working from home, maintaining 1 meter distance from others in public, and prohibiting public and private events. This regression includes province fixed effects, day-of-week fixed effects, and clustered standard errors at the day level. "Travel ban (opt), work from home, school closure" policies were enacted March 1-5, 2020 which overlaps with missing provincial case data in Iran on March 2-3, 2020. 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. R-squared 0.28 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 This regression includes state fixed effects, day-of-week fixed effects, and clustered standard errors at the day level. "Other social distance" includes policies such as closing libraries, maintaining 6 feet distance from others in public, and limiting visits to long term care facilities.
These regression tables a -f display the results from our main model estimating the effect of policy on daily COVID-19 infection growth rates in China, South Korea, Italy, Iran, France, and the United States. The regression model is estimated separately for each country, allowing for the policy type to have different average treatment effects for each country.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. Average effect of all policies on infection growth rates in our sample (analogous to the average difference between red and blue markers in Figure 3 of the main text) using models with different assumed delays of policy impact, ranging from a one day lag to a five day lag. The "0 Day Lag" column corresponds to the estimates reported in the main text. For models with non-zero lag, the lag structure of the estimating equation is such that for a model with an L day lag, the policy intervention implemented on day t is assumed to have no impact on infection growth rates until day t+L . As in the main text, for China and Korea, the reported effect size is the policy impact on the growth rate of active cases, where in the other countries cumulative cases are used. See Supplementary Methods 3 for a discussion of these results.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.22.20040642 doi: medRxiv preprint
