Italy currently constitutes the epicenter of the novel coronavirus disease : medRxiv preprint sweeping through Lombardy, which remains in lockdown since the 8th of March.
As of the same day, the isolation measures taken in Lombardy have been extended to the entire country. Here, we provide estimates for: (a) the DAY-ZERO of the outbreak in Lombardy, Italy; (b) the actual number of exposed/infected cases in the total population; (c) the basic reproduction number (R 0 ); (d) the "effective" per-day disease transmission; and, importantly, (e) a forecast for the fade out of the outbreak, on the basis of the COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports released by Google on March 29.
Methods. To deal with the uncertainty in the number of actual exposed/ infected cases in the total population, we address a compartmental Susceptible/ Exposed/ Infectious/ Recovered/ Dead (SEIRD) model with two compartments of infectious persons: one modelling the total cases in the population and another modelling the confirmed cases. The parameters of the model corresponding to the recovery period, the time from the onset of symptoms to death, the case fatality ratio, and the time from exposure to the time that an individual starts to be infectious, have been set as reported from clinical studies on COVID-19. For the estimation of the DAY-ZERO of the outbreak in Lombardy, as well as of the "effective" per-day transmission rate for which no clinical data are available, we have used the SEIRD simulator to fit the numbers of new daily cases from February 21 to the 8th of March, the lockdown day of Lombardy and of all Italy. This was accomplished by solving a mixed-integer optimization problem with the aid of genetic algorithms. Based on the computed values, we also provide an estimation of the basic reproduction number R 0 . Furthermore, based on an estimation for the reduction in the "effective" transmission rate of the disease as of March 8 that reflects the suspension of almost all activities in
Italy, we ran the simulator to forecast the fade out of the epidemic. For this purpose, we considered the reduction in mobility in
The butterfly effect in chaos theory underscores the sensitive dependence on initial conditions, highlighting the importance of even a small change in Italy from Wuhan who was admitted to the hospital in Codogno, Lombardy on 20 February 21 was the first secondary infection case ("patient 1"). "Patient 0" was never identified by tracing the first Italian citizen's movements and contacts. In less than a week, the explosive increase in the number of cases in several bordering regions and autonomous provinces of northern Italy placed enormous strain on the decentralized health system. Following a dramatic spike in deaths from 25 COVID-19, Italy transformed into a "red zone", and the movement restrictions were expanded to the entire country on the 8th of March. All public gatherings were cancelled and school and university closures were extended through at least the next month.
In an attempt to assess the dynamics of the outbreak for forecasting pur- 30 poses, as well as to estimate epidemiological parameters that cannot be computed directly based on clinical data, such as the transmission rate of the disease and the basic reproduction number, R 0 , defined as the expected number of exposed cases generated by one infected case in a population where all individuals are susceptible, many mathematical modelling studies have already appeared 35 since the first confirmed COVID-19 case. The first models mainly focused on the estimation of the basic reproduction number R 0 using dynamic mechanistic mathematical models ( [4, 5, 6, 7] ), but also simple exponential growth models (see e.g. [8, 9] ). Compartmental epidemiological models like SIR, SIRD, SEIR and SEIRD have been proposed to estimate other important epidemiological 40 parameters, such as the transmission rate and for forecasting purposes (see e.g. [7, 10] ). Other studies have used metapopulation models, which include data of human mobility between cities and/or regions to forecast the evolution of the outbreak in other regions/countries far from the original epicenter in China large percentage of asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic cases experiencing the disease like the common cold or the flu (see e.g. [14] ), and (b) the uncertainty regarding the DAY-ZERO of the outbreak, the knowledge of which is crucial to assess the stage and dynamics of the epidemic, especially during the first growth period. 55 To cope with the above problems, we herein propose a SEIRD with two compartments, one modelling the total infected cases in the population and another modelling the confirmed cases. The proposed modelling approach is applied to Lombardy, the epicenter of the outbreak in Italy, to estimate the scale of under-reporting of the number of actual cases in the total population, 60 the DAY-ZERO of the outbreak and for forecasting purposes. The above tasks were accomplished by the numerical solution of a mixed-integer optimization problem using the publicly available data of daily new cases for the period 
The modelling approach
We address a compartmental SEIRD model that includes two categories of infected cases, namely the confirmed/reported and the unreported (unknown) cases in the total population. Based on observations and studies, our modelling 70 hypothesis is that the confirmed cases of infected are only a (small) subset of the actual number of infected cases in the total population [6, 14, 7] . Regarding the confirmed cases of infected as of February 11, a study conducted by the Chinese longer than the non-confirmed, they may also be hospitalized and die from the 80 disease.
Based on the above, let us consider a well-mixed population of size N . The state of the system at time t, is described by (see also Figure 1 for a schematic) S(t) representing the number of susceptible persons, E(t) the number of exposed, I(t) the number of unreported infected persons in the total population 85 who are asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and recover relatively soon without any other complications, I c (t) the number of confirmed infected cases who may develop more severe symptoms and a part of them dies, R(t) the number of recovered persons in the total population, R c (t) the number of confirmed recovered cases and D(t) the number of deaths. For our analysis, and for such 90 a short period, we assume that the total number of the population remains constant. Based on demographic data, the total population of Lombardy is N = 10m; its surface area is 23,863.09 kmq and the population density is ∼422
The rate at which a susceptible (S) becomes exposed (E) to the virus is pro-95 portional to the density of infectious persons I in the total population, excluding the number of dead persons D.The proportionality constant is the "effective" disease transmission rate, say β =cp, wherec is the average number of contacts 6 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 20, 2020. . per day and p is the probability of infection upon a contact between a susceptible and an infected. Our main assumption here is that only a fraction, say of the 100 actual number of exposed cases I(t) are confirmed through testing and reported as I c (t). Thus, upon confirmation, we assume that the infected persons I c go into quarantine, and, thus, they don't transmit further the disease. A fraction of the confirmed I c cases that is given by the fatality ratio f =
dies with a mortality rate γ the inverse of which is the average time from the 105 onset of symptoms to death, while the rest part of the I c persons (1 − f ) recover with a rate δ c the inverse of which corresponds to the average time from the onset symptoms until the full recovery.
Thus, our discrete mean field compartmental SEIRD model reads:
The above system is defined in discrete time points t = 1, 2, . . ., with the 110 corresponding initial condition at the very start of the outbreak (DAY-ZERO):
The parameters of the model are:
• β(d −1 ) is the "effective" transmission rate of the disease,
• σ(d −1 ) is the average per-day "effective" rate at which an exposed person 115 becomes infective,
• δ(d −1 ) is the average per-day "effective" recovery rate within the group of 7 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 17.20037689 doi: medRxiv preprint unreported (asymptomatic/mild) cases in the total population,
• δ c (d −1 ) is the average per-day "effective" recovery rate within the subset of confirmed infected cases that finally recover, 120 • γ(d −1 ) is the average per-day "effective" mortality rate within the subset of confirmed infected cases that finally die, f is the probability that a confirmed case will die. This, is given by the "emergent" case fatality ratio defined as the ratio of confirmed deaths and the cumulative number of confirmed infected cases,
• (d −1 ) is the fraction of the actual (all) cases of exposed in the total population that get confirmed. This proportionality rate quantifies the uncertainty in the actual number of unreported cases in the total population.
Here, we should note the following: as new cases of recovered and dead 130 at each time t appear with a time delay (which is generally unknown but an estimate can be obtained by clinical studies) with respect to the corresponding infected cases, the above per-day rates are not the actual ones; thus, they are denoted as "effective/apparent" rates.
The values of the epidemiological parameters σ, δ, δ c , γ that were fixed in 135 the proposed model were chosen based on clinical studies.
In particular, in many studies that use SEIRD models, the parameter σ is set equal to the inverse of the mean incubation period (time from exposure to the development of symptoms) of a virus. However, the incubation period does not generally coincide with the time from exposure to the time that someone starts 140 to be infectious. Regarding COVID-19, it has been suggested that an exposed person can be infectious well before the development of symptoms [16] . With respect to the incubation period for SARS-CoV-2, a study in China [17] suggests that it may range from 2-14 days, with a median of 5.2 days. Another study in China, using data from 1,099 patients with laboratory-confirmed 2019-nCoV 145 ARD from 552 hospitals in 31 provinces/provincial municipalities suggested 8 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 17.20037689 doi: medRxiv preprint that the median incubation period is 4 days (interquartile range, 2 to 7). In our model, as explained above, 1 σ represents the period from exposure to the onset of the contagious period. Thus, based on the above clinical studies, for our simulations, we have set 1 σ = 3.
Regarding the recovery period, in a study that is based on 55,924 laboratoryconfirmed cases, the WHO-China Joint Mission has reported a median time of 2 weeks from onset to clinical recovery for mild cases, and 3-6 weeks for severe or critical cases [18] . Based on the above, and on the fact that within the subset of case-patient (infector) having symptoms and a secondary case-patient having again symptoms. In our model, the 1 σ = 3 period refers to the period from exposure to the onset of the contagiousness. In this period, obviously there 165 are no symptoms. Thus, the serial interval in our model is 7 days (this is the average number of days in which an infectious becomes recovered and no longer transmits the disease). Importantly, there are studies (see e.g. Nushiura et al. [20] ) suggesting that a substantial proportion of secondary transmission may occur prior to illness onset. Thus, the 7 days period that we have taken as the 170 average period that an infectious person can transmit the disease before he/she recovers, reflects exactly this period; it refers to the serial interval for the cases that are asymptomatic and for cases with mild symptoms.
Finally, the median time from the onset of symptoms until death for Italy has been reported to be eight days [21] , thus in our model we have set γ = 1/8.
The case fatality rate until March 19 was ∼11%. Thus, for our computations we have set the CF R = 11% until March 19, and for forecasting we have set 9 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 17.20037689 doi: medRxiv preprint CFR to its current value on April 4, CF R = 17%.
On the other hand, the transmission rate β cannot be obtained by clinical studies, but only by mathematical models. Here, for our computations, we have used the genetic algorithm "ga" provided by the Global Optimization Toolbox of Matlab [5] to minimize the following objective function:
where,
10 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 20, 2020. The weights w 1 , w 2 , w 3 correspond to scalars serving in the general case as weights to the relevant functions for balances the different scales between the number of infected, recovered cases and deaths.
At this point we should note that the above optimization problem may in principle have more than one nearby optimal solutions, which may be attributed to the fact that the tuning of both DAY-ZERO and the transmission rate may in essence result in nearby values of the objective function. In order to quantify the above uncertainty in the optimization procedure, we created a grid of initial 205 guesses within the intervals in which the optimal estimates were sought: for Supporting Information for more details). For the computed parameters of the corresponding best distributions, we also provide the corresponding 95% confidence intervals. Note, that the expected values of the resulting distributions do not correspond to optimal values, due to the approximation that is introduced 220 by the fitting procedure; however they correspond to expected/ most probable values around which an optimal solution is sought. Thus, for that purpose, we have used as initial guesses the mean values of the resulting distributions to the Levenberg-Marquard (implemented by the "lsqnonlin" function of matlab [23] ) to find the optimal solution around this "representative point" as well the 225 corresponding 95% confidence intervals. The step size for the finite differences 11 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. Note that there are three infected compartments, namely E, I, I c and two of them (E,I) that determine the outbreak. Thus, considering the corresponding equations given by Eq.(2),(3), (4) , and that at the very first days of the epidemic S ≈ N and D ≈ 0, the Jacobian of the system as evaluated at the disease-free 240 state reads:
The eigenvalues (that is the roots of the characteristic polynomial of the Jacobian matrix) dictate if the disease-free equilibrium is stable or not, that is if an emerging infectious disease can spread in the population. In particular, the disease-free state is stable, meaning that an infectious disease will not result 245 in an outbreak, if and only if all the norms of the eigenvalues of the Jacobian J of the discrete time system are bounded by one. Jury's stability criterion [24] (the analogue of Routh-Hurwitz criterion for discrete-time systems) can be used to determine the stability of the linearized discrete time system by analysis of 12 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 
where a 2 = 1
The necessary conditions for stability read:
The sufficient conditions for stability are given by the following two inequalities:
The first inequality (13) results in the necessary condition
It can be shown that the second necessary condition (14) and the sufficient condition (15) are always satisfied for the range of values of the epidemiological parameters considered here.
Thus, the necessary condition (17) is also a sufficient condition for stability.
Hence, the disease-free state is stable, if and only if, condition (17) is satisfied.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 
Note that for = 0, the above expression simplifies to R 0 for the simple SIR model. campaign prompting people to adopt cautious behaviors to reduce the risk of disease transmission (see also [26, 27, 28, 29] 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 
As discussed, for our computations we ran 48 times the numerical opti- For all the near-optimal points obtained using the genetic algorithm optimization, the residual was of the order of ∼ 4,750,000. Regarding the values of the optimal parameters, we fitted their cumulative probability distributions using several function including the Normal, Log-normal, Weibull, Beta, Gamma, Burr, Exponential and Birnbaum-Saunders functions and kept the one resulting the maximum Log-likelihood (see in the SI). Note that the optimal values of DAY-ZERO were between January 5 -January 23 (see Figure S1 ), the optimal values of β were between 0.63 and 0.9 (see Figure S2 ) and the optimal values of were between 0.01 and 0.27 (see Figure S3 ). The best fit to the 
The crucial questions about an outbreak is how, when (DAY-ZERO), why it started, and when it will end. Answers to these important questions would add 17 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 17.20037689 doi: medRxiv preprint 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.17.20037689 doi: medRxiv preprint 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.17.20037689 doi: medRxiv preprint 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 20, 2020. . include the closure of all parks, public and private offices and the prohibition of any pedestrian activity, even individually [31] . We predict that the COVID-19 However, we would like to stress that R 0 is NOT a biological constant for a 425 disease as it is affected not only by the pathogen, but also by many other factors, such as environmental conditions, the demographics, as well as, importantly, by the social behavior of the population (see for example the discussion in [35] ).
Thus, a value for R 0 that is found in a part of the world (and even in a region of the same country) cannot be generalized as a global biological constant for other
We did not receive any specific funding for this study.
The data used in this paper are given in the Supporting information. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.17.20037689 doi: medRxiv preprint . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.17.20037689 doi: medRxiv preprint . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 20, 2020. 
We fitted the cumulative probability distributions of DAY-ZERO β, using several functions including the Normal, Log-normal, Weibull, Beta, Gamma, Burr, Exponential and Birnbaum-Saunders CDFs and kept the one resulting in the maximum Log-likelihood. For the DAY-ZERO, the best fit to the distribution of the optimal values was obtained by the Normal CDF: The cumulative distribution of DAY-ZERO and the resulting exponential distribution are given in Figure S1 .
For the distribution of β values the best fitting distribution was obtained by the Burr CDF which is a three-parameter family of curves given by: Figure S2 .
For , the best fit to the distribution of the optimal values was obtained by a Birnbaum-Saunders CDF:
with µ = 0.0529 (95% CI: 0.0516, 0.054) (scale parameter) and α = 0.9314 (95% CI: 0.9112, 0.9515) (shape parameter). Φ(x) denotes the standard normal CDF. The mean value is given by:
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. Thus, the mean value is given by = 0.0758 (95% CI: 0.0730, 0.0788), while that of the actual distribution is 0.0759.
The cumulative distribution of and the resulting exponential distribution are given in Figure S3 .
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 17.20037689 doi: medRxiv preprint 
