BACKGROUND The outbreak of a novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2, previously provisionally named 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV) since December 2019 in Wuhan, China, has become an emergency of major international concern. Apart from the respiratory system, it is unclear whether SARS-CoV-2 can also directly infect other tissues such as the kidney or induce acute renal failure.
We conducted a retrospective analysis of estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) along with other clinical parameters from 85 patients with laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 . Kidney tissues from six patients with postmortem examinations were analyzed by Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) and in situ expression of viral nucleocaspid protein (NP) antigen, immune cell markers (CD8, CD68 and CD56) and the complement C5b-9 was detected by immunohistochemistry. Moreover, the viral particles in kidneys were also investigated by transmission electronic microscope (EM). RESULTS 27.06% (23/85) patients exhibited acute renal failure (ARF). The eldery patients and cases with comorbidities such as hypertension and heart failure more easily developed ARF (65.22% vs 24.19%, p< 0.001; 69.57% vs 11.29%, p< 0.001, respectively). H&E staining demonstrated kidney tissues from postmortems have severe acute tubular necrosis and lymphocyte infiltration.
Immunohistochemistry showed that SARS-CoV-2 NP antigen was accumulated in kidney tubules.
EM observation also demonstrated that viruses-like particles are visible in the kidneys. Viral infection not only induces CD68 + macrophages infiltrated into tubulointerstitium, but also enhances complement C5b-9 deposition on tubules.
In December 2019, a cluster of pneumonia cases caused by a novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) were reported in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China. 1 Some studies have suggested that SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV (Severe acute respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus) and MERS-CoV (Middle East Respiratory Syndrome-Coronavirus) share a common ancestor resembling the bat coronavirus HKU9-1. 8, 9 Recently, Shi et al., reported that SARS-CoV-2 interacts with human ACE2 (angiotensin converting enzyme-II) molecules via its Spike protein. 10 In addition to respiratory organs, the expression of ACE2 protein has also been observed in human kidneys, 11, 12 and Cheng et al., reported that some COVID-19 patients had an elevated level of proteinuria. 13 However, no evidence directly demonstrates that SARS-CoV-2 can infect the kidney to cause acute renal failure.
We retrospectively analyzed the clinical data on kidney function from 85 cases of COVID-19 who were admitted into the General Hospital of Central Theatre Command in Wuhan, Hubei Province, from January 17, 2020 to March 3, 2020 . To elucidate the mechanism of renal injury, we also used H&E staining and immunohistochemistry to visually assess tissue damage and viral presence in kidney tissues from six biopsies. independently reviewed the data collection forms to verify data accuracy. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.20031120 doi: medRxiv preprint Role of the funding source The funding agencies did not participate in study design, data collection, data analysis, or manuscript writing. The corresponding authors were responsible for all aspects of the study to ensure that issues related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work were properly investigated and resolved. The final version was approved by all authors.
We retrospectively analyzed laboratory kidney functions from 85 cases of COVID- 19 
Next, the histopathological examination was performed by H&E-staining in kidney specimens from autopsy of six COVID-19 subjects with observed renal function impairment. Varying degrees of acute tubular necrosis, luminal brush border sloughing and vacuole degeneration, were found in different areas of all six renal specimens. Severe infiltration of lymphocytes in the tubulointerstitium was observed in two patients, and moderate infiltration was seen in three cases, and the remaining one case manifested absence of lymphocyte infiltration. Moreover, viral infection associated-syncytia were also observed in three cases. At the same time, dilated capillary vessels were observed in the glomeruli of these 6 cases. Nevertheless, severe glomerular injury was absent in all of these six cases, although benign hypertensive glomerulosclerosis and autolysis were noted in three hypertensive patients (Figure 1, Table 2) . Collectively, these results demonstrated that SARS-CoV-2 infection mainly induces severe acute tubular necrosis and lymphocyte infiltration.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.20031120 doi: medRxiv preprint / 1 7 To confirm that SARS-CoV-2 might directly infect kidney tubules thus lead to tubular damage, the viral NP antigen was assessed by immunohistochemistry. Results showed that SARS-CoV-2 NP antigens could be seen in kidney tissues from all of these six samples, with NP expression restricted to kidney tubules, and NP-positive inclusion body was also observed. The NP-positive expression was observed in cytoplasm, but nuclear signals were not observed (Figure 2A) . Some NP-positive tubular epithelial cells were dropped from normal tubules (Figure 2B) , while NP-antigen was also absent in the glomerulus (Figure 2C) . The expression of NP protein in lung tissues from COVID-19
patients was used as positive controls (Figure 2D) , whereas normal kidney tissues (Figure 2E ) or renal sections from unrelated autopsies treated with rabbit isotype control antibodies ( Figure 2F) were used as negative controls. Collectively, these data suggest that SARS-CoV-2 directly infects kidney tubules.
Transmission electron microscopy (EM) was used to detect virions and virus-like particles in two kidneys from two autopsies. The results showed that cells in infected renal tissues were markedly swollen with expansion of mitochondria and lysosomes. The rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) and smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) are also dilated greatly. Interestingly, viruses-like particles with 80～160 nm diameters are observed in the broken lysosomes in cytoplasm, clearly identifiable due to high electron density and complete coating (Figure 3) .
Moreover, virus-like particles are all seen in both cases, demonstrating SARS-CoV-2 directly infects kidneys.
Since the infiltration of proinflammatory cells can significantly accelerate tubular damage, we next examined the identity of these infiltrated cells. Immunohistochemistry showed strong presence of CD68 + macrophages were in the tubulointerstitium of these six cases, while moderate numbers of CD8 + T cells were also observed in two cases, whereas, CD4 + T cells and CD56 + natural killer (NK) cells were seldom found in the examined tissues ( Figure 4A, Table 2 ), suggesting that SARS-CoV-2 might cause further tubular damage through recruiting macrophages to infiltrate into the tubulointerstitium.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.20031120 doi: medRxiv preprint / 1 7
As the deposition of the complement membrane-attack complex (MAC, also named C5b-9) on tubules or glomeruli may also cause renal damage, 14 we further analyzed C5b-9 status in kidney tissues from these postmortems. Interestingly, strong C5b-9 depositions on tubules were observed in all of these six cases. Very low levels of C5b-9 deposition on glomeruli and capillaries were also seen in two cases. However, C5b-9 expression is absent in normal kidney tissue ( Figure 4B , Table   2 ), suggesting that SARS-CoV-2 infection induces acute tubular necrosis and ARF through triggering C5b-9 deposition.
In this study, we found that 27.06% of patients with COVID-9 had abnormal eGFR, and patients who are aged or have comorbidities more commonly developed ARF ( had an elevated level of proteinuria. 13 Collectively, these results illustrate that SARS-CoV-2 mediated ARF may be one of the major causes of multiorgan failure and eventual death in COVID-19 patients.
The extents of tubular atrophy and interstitial disease are the strongest histological parameters which correlate with renal function and predict progression. To further analyze how SARS-CoV-2 affects renal function, we focused on analyzing renal tissue morphology from autopsies. H&E staining showed that acute renal tubular damage and lymphocyte infiltration was observed in all six cases during postmortem examinations, while the glomeruli were intact, except for some cases with slight glomerulosclerosis, suggesting that other conditions such as hypertension and diabetic nephropathy may have been involved in the pathogenesis (Figure 1) . It has been shown that the ACE-2 receptor of SARS-CoV-2 is highly expressed in renal tubules. 12, 16 We used immunohistochemistry to analyze the expression of viral NP antigen in situ in kidney tissues, and found that viral NP antigen was restricted to the renal tubular cells of the infected tissues (Figure 2) .
Most important, EM observation demonstrated that viruses-like particles are also visible in the infected kidneys (Figure 3) . This phenomenon is consistent with SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, both of which can also infect human kidneys. 17, 18 Recently, some researchers have reported they have . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.20031120 doi: medRxiv preprint / 1 7 successfully isolated SARS-CoV-2 virus particles from the urine of COVID-19 patients, suggesting that kidney-originated viral particles may enter the urine through glomerular filtration. Taken together with our study, these results demonstrate that the kidney is also a site of viral infection and replication outside of the lungs.
While SARS-CoV-2 is a cytopathic virus which can also directly induce renal tubular injury during infection and replication, the occurrence of such injury may also initiate complex immune responses. After all, although host immune cells can infiltrate into infected tissue to counteract viral replication, hyperactivation of immune cells may instead promote fibrosis, induce epithelial cell apoptosis, and cause microvasculature changes. [19] [20] [21] We report here that SARS-CoV-2 virus recruits high levels of CD68 + macrophages to infiltrate into the tubulointerstitium (Figure 4A) , suggesting that proinflammatory cytokines derived from macrophages would induce tubular damage. Both clinical and experimental models suggest that the abnormal presence of serum-derived complement components in the tubular lumen leads to the assembly of the complement C5b-9 (via the alternative pathway) on the apical brush border of tubular epithelial cells (TECs), and that this is an important factor in the pathogenesis of tubulointerstitial damage. [22] [23] [24] We here observed that SARS-CoV-2 initiates complement C5b-9 assembly and deposition on tubules ( Figure 4B) . We therefore demonstrate that SARS-CoV-2 causes tubular damage through direct cytotoxicity, but also initiates immune-mediates tubule pathogenesis.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the SARS-CoV-2 virus can directly infect human renal tubules and consequently lead to acute renal tubular injury. Moreover, improvement of eGFR would increase the survival of COVID-19 patients who have ARF. We strongly suggest that applying potential interventions including continuous renal replacement therapies (CRRT) for protecting kidney function in COVID-19 patients, particularly for ARF cases, maybe a key method to preventing fatality.
The authors declare no financial or commercial conflict of interest.
Yuzhang Wu, and Yongwen Chen were involved in the final development of the project and manuscript preparation; Zilin Yuan, Chenghui Wang and Zeqing Feng analyzed the data; Chenghui . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.20031120 doi: medRxiv preprint / 1 7 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.20031120 doi: medRxiv preprint / 1 7 Figure 3 The virus-like particles are observed in kidney by EM. EM was used to detect virions in two kidney tissues from two autopsies, and viruses-like particles with 80～160 nm diameters are observed in the broken lysosomes in cytoplasm, clearly identifiable due to high electron density and complete coating. Arrow indicated virus-like particles.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.20031120 doi: medRxiv preprint . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.20031120 doi: medRxiv preprint
