Background: Severe acute respiratory coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a newly identified virus which mainly spreads from person-to-person. Presence of SARS-CoV-2 has been constantly reported in stools of patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
However, there is a paucity of data concerning fecal shedding of the virus in pediatric patients.
Objective: To investigate dynamic changes of SARS-CoV-2 in respiratory and fecal specimens in children with COVID-19. , three pediatric cases of were reported in Qingdao, Shandong Province, China. Epidemiological, clinical, laboratory, and radiological characteristics and treatment data of these children were collected. Real-time fluorescence reverse-transcriptase-polymerase-chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed to detect SARS-CoV-2 RNA in throat swabs and fecal specimens. Patients were followed up to March 10, 2020, the final date of follow-up, and dynamic profiles of RT-PCR results were closely monitored.
Results: All the three pediatric cases were household contacts of adults whose symptoms developed earlier. Severity of disease was mild to moderate and fever was the most consistent and predominant symptom at onset of illness of these children (two cases had body temperature higher than 38.5°C). All children showed increased lymphocytes (>4.4×10 9 /L) with normal white blood cell counts on admission. Radiological changes were not typical for COVID-19. All children showed good response to supportive treatment. Clearance of SARS-CoV-2 in respiratory tract occurred within two weeks after abatement of fever, whereas viral RNA remained positive in stools of pediatric patients for longer than 4 weeks. Two children had fecal SARS-CoV-2 turned negative 20 days after throat swabs showing negative, while that of another child lagged behind for 8 days.
Interpretation: SARS-CoV-2 may exist in gastrointestinal tract for a longer time than respiratory system. Persistent shedding of SARS-CoV-2 in stools of infected children indicates the potential for the virus to be transmitted through fecal excretion. Massive efforts should be made at all levels to prevent spreading of the infection among children after reopening of kindergartens and schools.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
On December 12, 2019, 27 pneumonia cases of unknown cause emerged in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China. 1 The etiological agent was identified as a novel coronavirus and was later renamed as severe acute respiratory coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) by the world health organization (WHO). 2, 3 The pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has wreaked havoc in China and spread rapidly to about ninety countries, constituting a global threat with the highest risk impact. 4 Epidemiological evidence gained in China suggested that most individuals lack relevant immunity and are generally susceptible to the virus. The majority of published studies of COVID-19 focused on adult populations. [5] [6] [7] [8] While knowledge on SARS-CoV-2 infection in children are still yet to be fully developed and only a limited number of case reports of pediatric patients are currently available. [9] [10] [11] [12] As of February 23, 2020, a cumulative total of 60 confirmed COVID-19 cases were temperature for more than 3 days", "with obvious features of absorption of inflammation shown in lung imaging" and "negative results of the nucleic acid tests of respiratory pathogens for consecutive two times [sampling interval at least 1 day]"). 13
From January 17, 2020 to February 23, 2020, a total of 60 patients were diagnosed with COVID-19 in Qingdao, Shandong Province, China. We recruited all three pediatric patients with laboratory confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection who were reported by the local health authority. Diagnosis of COVID-19 was based on the WHO interim guidance. 14 Patients were followed up on a regular basis after hospital discharge till March 10, 2020. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 11.20033159 doi: medRxiv preprint This study was approved by the Ethics Commission of Qingdao Women and Children's Hospital (QFFLL-KY-2020-11) and written informed consent was obtained from patients' legal guardians prior to enrolment.
Personal, clinical, laboratory, and radiological characteristics and treatment and outcomes information were obtained with standardized data collection forms from electronic medical records. Additionally, we directly contacted patients' families to ascertain epidemiological and symptom information. Data were entered into a computerized database and doublechecked by two researchers independently.
Throat swabs were obtained from patients on admission. Fecal specimens were first collected in two patients (case 1, 1.5-year-old male; and case 2, 5-year-old male) on day 4 after onset of the disease. While the stool sample from another patient (case 3, 6-year-old female) was obtained 9 days after hospital discharge. To monitor the dynamic changes of viral shedding, we obtained throat swabs from patients every day during hospitalization and every other day during follow-up after discharge. Fecal specimens were collected applying a similar rationale since the first day of sample collection (samples from case 3 were only collected during follow-up period). Presence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA was detected by real-time fluorescence reverse-transcriptase-polymerase-chain reaction (RT-PCR) using a commercial kit approved by the China Food and Drug Administration. Detailed procedures were described elsewhere. 15 author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.11.20033159 doi: medRxiv preprint Laboratory findings of these children on admission to hospital are shown in Table 1 . On admission, all the children had increased lymphocyte count (>4.4×10 9 /L). Only case 1 showed decreased neutrophil count (<1.7×10 9 /L), whereas those of the other two children were within normal range. Elevation of platelets was observed in case 1 and case 2. Case 3 had increased levels of procalcitonin (0.73 ng/mL) and C-reaction protein (10.5 mg/L), while serum level of D-dimer (860.0 ng/mL) was found elevated in case 1. Reduced level of serum creatinine was detected in case 1 and case 2 (<41.0 µmol/L). Transverse chest computed tomograms (CT) showed delicate patches of ground glass opacity of lower lobe of right lung in case 1 on day 1 after symptom onset and consolidation changes of the left lower lobe near the pleura in case 2 on admission; while case 3 had no abnormality on CT imaging (Figure 1) .
Two pediatric patients (case 1 and case 2) and their family members with SARS-CoV-2 infection were admitted in Qingdao Women and Children's Hospital. During clinical practice, we noticed that the time for viral RNA in respiratory specimens turning negative was similar between pediatric patients and infected adults (these children's family members). At this point, adult patients had negative results for nucleic acid testing in fecal specimens, whereas SARS-CoV-2 RNA remained detectable in stools from the two infected children. Therefore, we conducted a quarantine and surveillance protocol for the children and their family members who were already qualified for hospital discharge according to current standards after recovery with two consecutively negative RT-PCR test results in throat swabs (sampling interval at least 1 day). Concerned about the possibility of fecal-oral transmission, we recorded the timeline of changes in nucleic acid testing results in both throat swabs and fecal samples collected from these patients (Figure 2 ). All adult patients of the two families showed negative results for fecal SARS-CoV-2 RNA detection. Strikingly, viral RNA remained detectable in stools of the two children for 8 and 20 days, respectively, after nucleic acid turning negative in respiratory samples.
We suspected whether this phenomenon also existed in the third pediatric patient (case 3) who was admitted in another designated hospital in Qingdao. Unfortunately, by the time we reached the patient, this child had already been "cured" and discharged. Medical professionals of this hospital did not collect fecal specimens from the patient and they only author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.11.20033159 doi: medRxiv preprint from case 3 and the child's family members 9 days after hospital discharge. This child showed positive results for RT-PCR analysis in feces. During quarantine and follow-up period, clearance of SARS-CoV-2 in stool samples occurred 20 days after viral RNA in respiratory specimens turning negative. Detailed information was not available as no fecal sample was examined during hospitalization.
The newly issued report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on COVID-19 summarized the evidence so far on SARS-CoV-2 and pointed out 2.4% of those infected were individuals below 18 years of age. 18 According to data released by the China Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, only 0.9% of COVID-19 patients were children under the age of 10 years. 19 Among the 60 patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 in Qingdao, 3 (5%) cases were children younger than 10 years of age.
Most of the pediatric COVID-19 patients had mild disease with good treatment response and a relatively short time to resolution, with exception of one critically ill case reported in Wuhan. 12 Consistent with previous findings, the three infected children in our study only presented with fever and mild cough or with no obvious symptom but CT abnormalities.
From available data, children appeared to be slightly affected by SARS-CoV-2, a feature resembling that of SARS-CoV emerged 17 years ago. 20 However, the relatively low attack rate of COVID-19 in children could be explained by the stringent implementation of home confinement and prolonged school closure during the outbreak as required by the Chinese governments. Whether it is also the case during school year is hard to tell. One distinct feature of pediatric cases is that almost all of them are infected through household contact with adult patients. [9] [10] [11] [12] 21 As with all new diseases, many characteristics of COVID-19 still remain largely unknown. There is limited data to support the notion that children are less susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection or virus transmission is less effective among them. Viral RNA has been constantly detected in stool samples and anal swabs collected from confirmed cases of COVID-19. 5, [22] [23] [24] [25] In one study, fecal specimens from 9 (53%) of 17 patients were positive for nucleic acid testing, although viral loads of the stool were less than those of respiratory samples. 24 Presence of SARS-CoV-2 was even detected in environmental samples taken from the surface of toilet bowl and sink in infection isolation rooms. 26 Moreover, SARS-CoV-2 remained viable in the stool of infected patients as reported by some case reports. 18 Evidence so far indicates the potential for SARS-CoV-2 to be transmitted through fecal excretion. 18 Although the role of fecal shedding in viral All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.11.20033159 doi: medRxiv preprint transmission has not been systematically determined, a cautious approach is warranted when handling stool samples.
While we were closely monitoring the dynamic changes of fecal SARS-CoV-2 in our patients, a 6-year-old boy in Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China, was reported to be under more than 34 days of hospitalization due to prolonged presence of viral RNA in stools after showing negative in respiratory samples. Actually, this phenomenon is not rare among pediatric patients. 27 Xiao and colleagues demonstrated that about a quarter of COVID-19 patients had SARS-CoV-2 RNA detectable in feces after viral clearance in respiratory tract. 25 However, the researchers did not discuss whether persistent shedding of SARS-CoV-2 was more common in certain age group than the others (patient's ages ranged from 10 months to 78 years in this study). Therefore, discharged patients might be a potential source of transmission and follow-up after hospital discharge or discontinuation of quarantine is advisable. The limitations of this study should also be noted. In response to the emerging disease, only respiratory specimens were required for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 according to clinical guidelines in the early stage of COVID-19 outbreak. We therefore failed to obtain stool samples from the patients during their first few days of hospitalization and could not determine whether throat swabs and fecal samples showed positive on RT-PCR analysis simultaneously. Moreover, we did not culture the virus isolated from the feces to test the viability nor measure viral loads in the samples due to limited conditions. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.11.20033159 doi: medRxiv preprint 
None reported. author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.11.20033159 doi: medRxiv preprint
The funders had no role in the design and conduct of the study; collection, management, analysis, and interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit the manuscript for publication.
We thank Municipal Centre of Disease Control and Prevention of Qingdao for coordinating data collection for COVID-19 patients in Qingdao. We thank all patients and their families involved in the study. We thank all health-care workers involved in the diagnosis and treatment of patients. And we thank Prof Gary WK Wong for guidance in study design and interpretation of results. author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.11.20033159 doi: medRxiv preprint ↓ denotes levels below the 1st percentile lower reference limit; NA= not available.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the 
