China is running a national level antivirus campaign against the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV). Strict control measures are being enforced in either the populated areas and remote regions. While the virus is closed to be under control, tremendous economic loss has been caused.
We assessed the pandemic risk of 2019-nCoV for all cities/regions in China using the random forest algorithm, taking into account the effect of five factors: the accumulative and increased numbers of confirmed cases, total population, population density, and GDP. We defined four levels of the risk, corresponding to the four response levels to public health emergencies in China. The classification system has good consistency among cities in China, as the error rate of the confusion matrix is 1.58%.
The pandemic risk of 2019-nCoV is dramatically different among the 442 cities/regions. We recommend to adopt proportionate control policy according to the risk level to reduce unnecessary economic loss.
The novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) has infected 66,576 people and caused 1524 deaths in China by Feb. 15 , 2020 [1] . It has spread to 25 countries [1] with the potential of further transmission [2] [3] [4] . On Jan. 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the novel coronavirus outbreak to be "public health emergency of international concern" [5] . The countries with local infection of 2019-nCoV, such as Japan and Singapore, are implementing a moderate prevention policy against this flu-like infectious disease, similar to the situation of Wuhan in early January, 2020.
On the contrary, China is running a national level antivirus campaign. All of the 31 provinces and province-level municipalities in mainland China have initiated the first-level response to public health emergencies after the city closure of Wuhan on Jan. 23, 2020. Very strict control measures are enforced all over the country, such as tourism ban, school closure, meeting cancelation, etc. Compared with the prevention activities against SARS 17 years ago, traffic control and community locking are much more stricter, let alone the unprecedented province lockdown that constraining over 58 million people locally [6] .
As a result, the control of 2019-nCoV in China is very effective [6] [7] [8] [9] . The increases of the number of confirmed cases in most cities has dropped. No new cases have emerged in more than half cities in China on Feb. 14. While the half-lockout of industry, traffic, and school, etc., people are wondering how long the campaign will last and how soon the they can return to normal life.
We evaluated the risk of 2019-nCoV outbreak in cities and regions across China and suggested four levels of risk, highlighting that the cities with low risk should return to the normal status in order to avoid unnecessary economic loss.
We compiled the number of daily confirmed cases of 2019-nCoV ( Fig.1 ) from the platform of real time epidemic situation for every city hosted by Baidu ™ at (https://voice.baidu.com/act/newpneumonia/newpneumonia/?from=osari_pc_1). We . CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 
We used the random forest algorithm [10] and developed the following model:
where Yi is the response level of city i to public health emergencies; Ni is the number of cumulative confirmed cases on Feb. 14 in city i; ΔNi is the increased number of cases on Feb. 14 in city i; Popi, Densityi, and GDPi are the population size, population density, and GDP of city i, respectively.
The purpose of above model is to assign a response level, Yi for each city. In the beginning, we manually assigned Yi =1 for the top 10 cities with 2019-nCoV infection, and Yi =4 for the 10 least infected cities. Then we gave random numbers for Yi from {1, 2, 3, 4} to the rest of cities. We built the random forest model RF using Equation 1 . RF contains the relationship between the dependent and independent variables. We used RF to predict the Yi for every city, and used the newly calculated Yi to update RF. We repeated the model learning process for 5-6 times until a low error rate was reached. In practice, we first defined Yi as a continuous variable, . CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 
Our model classified 442 cities with the four levels of response for public health emergencies (Fig. 3) . There are 16 cities, all in Hubei Province, being assigned with the highest risk, the level I. The number of cities that were classified as risk levels II, III, and IV are 60, 67, and 299, respectively (Fig .3) .
. CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.16.20023838 doi: medRxiv preprint The classification for 442 cities has good consistency, as the overall error rate of the confusion matrix is only 1.58% (Table 1) . is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.16.20023838 doi: medRxiv preprint
The risk level of cities was classified using five variables, whereas the variables had different weights in the model, quantified by importance indices in random forest model [11] (Fig. 4) . Similarly, GDP is an index of economic activities, which links to human flow and virus transmission rate.
We used a machine learning algorithm, random forest, to classify the risk levels.
One reason is that variables such as population size, population density and GDP are highly correlated. Random forest is very robust when multicollinearity is severe [12] .
Another reason is that the numbers of cases are unbalanced among cities. In Wuhan, there are 39,249 confirmed cases by Feb. 16, whereas other large cities have a few hundred cases. Traditional linear models can not fit well with such a data distribution.
. CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org /10.1101 /10. /2020 The purpose of our study is to provide a risk map of 2019-nCoV outbreak, so as to facilitate decision makers to adjust virus prevention policy. It is a great challenge to fight effectively and appropriately against a pandemic [13, 14] , especially when we do not know much about the novel coronavirus [2, 15] . Rational and proportionate responses to such a virus outbreak are needed. At present, the strict control measures, for the areas with minor infection (which is under control), are overreacted.
The transmission of 2019-nCoV in cities outside Hubei Province is largely suspended [6] . From Feb.13 to Feb. 14, there are 231 cities have no new cases, and another 39 cities have only one new case (Fig. 1B) . The risk in the Tibet Autonomous Region, Qinghai Province, Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, Gansu Province, and Western Inner Mongolia Autonomous region is very low. We suggest rational, proportionate control measures ( Table 2) . For example, the cities with the risk level IV (Fig. 3) should return to normal status, under the condition of border control, in case of imported infections from high risk areas. There is a high probability that a few transmission clusters of 2019-nCoV would happen after loosing the control in several provinces. Under such circumstance, the cities where virus returned should be managed again under higher level of responses to the public health emergencies.
Fighting against 2019-nCoV would be a long process, due to the three characteristics of this epidemics (long incubation period, asymptomatic infection, and high-false-negative-rate diagnosis) [6] . The transmission of 2019-nCoV is naturally (exponentially) growing in Japan and Singapore, increasing the risk of a global outbreak. Even after this transmission wave, 2019-nCoV might come back in every winter. As such, proportionate control is especially important for sustainable protect human from the infectious diseases.
. CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
(which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.16.20023838 doi: medRxiv preprint
