The spread of COVID-19 engulfs almost all the countries and territories of the planet, and infections and fatality are increasing rapidly. The first epi-center of its' massive spread was in Wuhan, Hubei province, China having a temperate weather, but the spread has got an unprecedented momentum in European temperate countries mainly in Italy and Spain (as of March 30, 2020). However, Malaysia and Singapore and the neighboring tropical countries of China got relatively low spread and fatality that created a research interest on whether there are potential impacts of weather condition on COVID-19 spread. Adopting the SIR (Susceptible Infected Removed) deviated model to predict potential cases and death in the coming days from COVID-19 was done using the secondary and official sources of data. This study shows that COVID-19 spread and fatality tend to be high across the world but compared to tropical countries, it is going to be incredibly high in the temperate countries having lower temperature (7-16°C) and humidity (80-90%) in last March. However, some literature predicted that this might not to be true, rather irrespective of weather conditions there might be a continuous spread and death. Moreover, a large number of asymptotic COVID-19 carrier in both temperate and tropical countries may re-outbreak in the coming winter. Therefore, a comprehensive global program with the leadership of WHO for testing of entire population of the world is required, which will be very useful for the individual states to take proper political action, social movement and medical services.
After the incidence of some mysterious SARS-like cluster pneumonia, cases with unknown aetiology on December Wuhan, the center of coronavirus easing of its' 'City Closure' situation after a lap of two months since 23 January, 2020 for successful attempts of the Chinese Government (7,8), when the other countries have newly been imposed the lockdown for uncertain period of time. The recent claim of China that the new COVID-19 cases essentially to zero has become possible for their quick action of test widely to isolate infected ones, stunted peoples' unpopular movement except to get food and medical care, prohibit the leaving of own cities even homes of people and more importantly accepting the deep economy damage shut downed whole processing industry. The peak and quick recovery of the China made relax the rest of the world particularly the European countries. Moreover, Government of European countries' emphasize attitude towards public opinion for being of affluent democracies and peoples' free movement, easy travel and independent decision-making, which is now paying a price by counting 100,000 COVID-19 confirmed cases and 5,000 deaths with high fatality rate each dayexpecting that the worst is yet to come (9).
By defying the geographical and political boundaries of western and temperate countries (like Italy, Spain, UK, USA etc.) the novel coronavirus has invaded towards tropical countries, excluding only a fewer than two dozen countries on the earth where there are no COVID-19 cases reported, so far. However, growth rate of conformed cases and fatalities are apparently slower in Asian tropical countries (like Malaysia, Singapore, Vietnam, Thailand etc.) than that of European temperate countries (10). This gap might be due to tropical countries with moderate economy are tended to be resource poor, not capable to do regular testing or there might be an impact of tropical weather to reduce the pandemic nature COVID-19, rather be a panic. A number of studies (11,12) argued that higher temperature and high relative humidity reduce the spreading capacity of new coronavirus to a greater extent, while there it would be popped again in 2020-2021 winter season (13). Researchers along with epidemiological experts also predicting COVID-19 cannot take advantage and bridgehead in the tropics than in the world's temperate regions (14) . A spatial analysis conducted by a research team from University of Maryland revealed that the transmission of COVID-19 lies mostly the regions across the equator where temperature ranges between 05-11°C with the combination of low specific (3-6 g/kg) and absolute humidity (4-7 g/m 3 ) (15).
Depending on this complex context of COVID-19, this study is outlined to unpack the answers of the following research questions and formulate some recommendations to minimize the spread of COVID-19.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052928 doi: medRxiv preprint
• What is the general trend of predictive cases and fatalities caused by Covid19 until end of April 2020 across the world?
• Is there any difference between the trends of the tropical and temperate countries?
• If there is a difference or otherwise, what are the recommendation to curve the spread of Covid19?
Since the outbreak of coronavirus disease an exhaustive literature review related to the different aspects of COVID-19 and its' relationships with different climatologic parameters and further forecasting was carried out. Published manuscripts, reports from different competent authorities, database and other documents on key areas of COVID-19 in different parts of the world were identified through searches in online journal sources and other available electronic sources.
The proposed SIR (Susceptible Infected Removed) deviated model developed by Choi and Pak (16) during the outbreak of SARS on 2003, was adopted in this study to make a prediction about the suspected cases and death from being the onset of COVID-19. The COVID-19 transmission pattern from person-to-person, no pint source nature and negligible amount of immunity development by the exposure patient during the inaugural stage of COVID-19 pandemic is more likely to SARS epidemic. Therefore, the same model was adopted using the same four available parameters basic reproduction number (R0), case fatality rate (F), incubation period (i) and duration of disease (d) regarding COVID-19 revealed by other researchers.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052928 doi: medRxiv preprint
Basic reproductive number (R0) and incubation period (i) requires to play this model. Any disease become epidemic in any population of a geographical area by increasing the secondary cases from a single (typical) infection in that complete susceptible population is termed as basic reproduction number (17). And the incubation period is the time laps between initial infection and disease onset (18). The R0 will be changed by the increasing of i. Following the first incubation period, the total number of cases will be 1+ R0 for being the producing of R0 new cases from the single infectious case at the very beginning of the disease forming its' epidemic nature. This will follow the quadrilateral nature in the subsequent periods of incubation and the total cases will be as 1 + (1 + R0) + (1 + R0 + R0 2 ) + …………. + (1 + R0 + R0 2 + ……… + R0 i ).
If we consider C as the total number of predicted cases, then on t·i days the predicted number of incidents will be Ct·i. Predicted total cases (C) of COVID-19 was calculated following the modified equation of Choi and Pak, (2003). ∁ = 1 + (1 + 0 ) + (1 + 0 + 0 2 ) + … … … + (1 + 0 + 0 2 + … … … + 0 i ) = ∑ ∁ t·i ---------------------(i) Equation (i) was tested by taking imaginary value of R0 =5 and i = 5 days that predict that on day 15 there will be 125 new cases with the resulting of total 156 cases (Table 1) .
Like the case prediction of any epidemic disease, death prediction can also be done by a model using some parameters like basic reproductive number (R0), incubation period (i), duration of disease (d) and case fatality rate (F). Among these the first two is same of the case prediction model. Duration of disease (d) is the average time to diagnose people either cured or die. In more simple words maximum days to onset symptoms of the disease and if not disease diagnosed . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint 
For predicting the total number of deaths, it is needed just to sum of all values get from the equation (ii). Therefore, the predicted total number of deaths is
A trial was done for equation (ii) with the same value taken for equation (i) and taking the value for F = 20% and d = 14 days. The attempt reveals the prediction that first 0.2 persons will die from day 0 cases on day 14. Cases from day 5 will give 1 new death prediction with a total 1.2 persons' death on day 19 (Table 2 ). CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052928 doi: medRxiv preprint fatality rate (F) were required. The disease duration for COVID-19 has been set 14 days by WHO (28) used in this study. This means the case from day 0 will be recovered or dead on day 14. Similarly, from second incubation period i.e. patient from day 5 recovered or dead on day 19 and so on. Case fatality rate (F) values of COVID-19 is differed in different studies (29) (30) (31) , however to avoid the regional confinement, here in this study WHO reported COVID-19 case fatality rate (F) 3.4% (3) was used. This pointed that the death from the cases day 0 is 0.034 (1×3.4%) on day 14, as opposed to be recovered 0.966 people. The values of R0 and i selected in the was well adjusted with d and F values selected from WHOs' report.
In case of determining the prediction for sub-tropical and tropical countries the incubation period (i) and duration of disease (d) values kept same, as these values do not vary by geographical variation for any kind of infectious disease (32) . For basic reproduction number (R0) and fatality rate (F) the values revealed by different regional researchers were collected, checked with the i and d value for adjustment and finalized (Table 3) .
It was required two different types of data. Since for the prediction of daily new cases and deaths from COVID-19 the data from the official website of WHO (https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019) and Center for Systems Science and Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, USA (https://www.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/bda7594740fd40299423467b48e9ecf6) were used. The weather data of temperate and tropical countries were gathered from authentic website of Weather Atlas (https://www.weather-atlas.com). All the collected data was imputed, analyzed and generated results using Excel (Microsoft Corporation).
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052928 doi: medRxiv preprint (Table 4) .
During the writeup of this study Italy and Spain are the two most vulnerable sub-tropical countries selected for this study to tale the COVID-19 incidental difference between sub-tropical and tropical countries. After the exact one-month laps of the first incidence of COVID-19 the deadly virus in Wuhan, China; the first reported case in for both Italy and Spain was on January 31, 2020. The result is presented of 90 days, while there is arrayed comparative results of predicted and observed for two months and another one month only predicted results. Predicted cases of both Italy and Spain was same as we used the same basic reproduction value for being of the countries from the same temperate and geographical position. However, the predicted total death varies across the countries as the fatality rate was not same (Table 5 and CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint (Table 8 ).
The number of predicted cases and death was very much resembled after a certain time interval with that of the actual number of cases and death for both global and regional population, however it has some unexpected difference. Actual forecasting like "How many people will be affected onset by the following days" or "The outbreak going to be peak or not in the coming month?" of an epidemic disease from a transmission dynamics based model is quite tough (33). This is because the transmission dynamics based model is developed foothold on the official clinical surveillance data, which comes through a bureaucratic reporting chain of public health officials and government employees (34) who have to maintain privacy concern owing to geographical resolutions. Moreover, human (host) social behavior (35), potential changes in the pathogen (36) and host-pathogen interaction (37) dominates the epidemic models to a greater extent, while these are continuously change within an epidemic period. In case of COVID-19 the prediction from this study can be rippled for being down warding the basic reproduction value, which is already slowed from 2.9 to 2.4 (26) and also of the fatality rate which must be slow downed on the coming days for taking effective measure by the affected countries.
Using the existing value of different parameters and incorporated the values in the epidemic model we revealed an estimation of global total cases (2286404188) and death numbers . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. method. The prediction of these researchers will be close to half of our prediction including China if it continues to April 29, 2020, the end date until which we continued our prediction.
The COVID-19 transmission shows a different trend of spread between the European temperate and Asian tropical countries. Though the first incident time has a gap of about one month, however the scenario between the countries of these two climatic regions has a head and tail difference. European countries is suffocating from the current COVID-19, a uncontrollable situation given applying modern medical facilities for their citizens by ensuring 11.5 critical care beds per 100,000 head of population (42) comparing with the only 3.6 critical care beds per 100,000 population in the entire Asian countries. The problem for European countries specifically in Italy and Spain is that they are getting 8.5 and 8.9 confirmed COVID-19 cases against per critical care bed (43), which is bounding them to take impossible choice of setting age limit for access to critical care bed. Though the European countries followed the same lockdown, test-trace-isolate infected ones', social distance strategy to defeat COVID-19 like . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052928 doi: medRxiv preprint other Asian counterparts, however it was a bit delay to take initiatives by the decision-making authorities for slow, hesitant and in some cases even chaotic management being of their liberal democratic culture. Experts now also raised question about the effectuated tests quantity as well as quality variation between the two parts of the world when facing the same problem.
Moreover, there is criticism from the expert community for the individualistic hedonists of the Europeans, that dared the Government authorities to impose social distance or self-quarantine, which was quite easy in Asian countries for community-driven, and hierarchical nature of political and administrative intuitions. Not like war, the real war against pandemic COVID-19 the Europe's 27 centers of decision and 27 lines of command also lambaste by their own parliament member (44).
Concerning to climatic pattern, there is also vice-versa prediction from the scientist and epidemiologist communities. Expert opinion is that the Asian countries is taking advantage from onset spring and will be favored on door knocking summer from COVID-19 cold shock for their geographical position and climatic condition. Lowen and Stell (45) argued that the dropletmediated viral disease (SARS and MARS) survived in low absolute humidity (cold and dry weather) and attenuated the viral transmission in high absolute humidity (warm and humid weather), which can also be true for their genetic cousin COVID-19. However, Luo et al., (46) burst a vigilant caution that, the increasing temperature and humidity on the onset summer cannot hold back the COVID-19 transmission race too early. If anyhow the transmission is settled down in temperate countries taking the favor of high temperature and humidity, then Neher et al., (13) warned for having the chance of larger peak in the winter of 2020/21. Moreover, given the condition of very low spreads and fatality in the tropical countries, tend to be developing countries having very poor capacity of diagnosis and medical services, if the . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052928 doi: medRxiv preprint COVID-19 infections remain asymptotic until coming winter and then it respreads, it will be a toughest job in the planet for the millions of people to survive. Therefore, with the global leadership of the WHO, a comprehensive diagnosis of all the people irrespective of nationalities has to be implemented when going to get a window of opportunity for better preparation of health care systems, they must make hay while the sun shines by next six months. This will provide the information base for the individual countries to take the actions from the viewpoints of political action, social movement and health services.
Based on the analysis of secondary data in a predictive model, it was found that the that COVID-19 spread and fatality tend to be high globally but compared to tropical countries, it is going to be incredibly high in the temperate countries for having lower temperature (7-16°C) and humidity (80-90%). However, some literature predicted that this might not be true, rather irrespective of weather conditions there might be a large number of asymptotic COVID-19 carrier in everywhere in the world particularly in the developing countries which have limited capacity of diagnosis and medical service, will be unknown unless the entire population is diagnosed. The asymptotic career might be the cause of outbreak in the coming winter while whether will be again favorable for COVID-19 incubation in both tropics of the world. Therefore, a comprehensive program with the leadership of WHO for testing of entire population of the world is required, which will be very useful for the individual government of member states of the United Nations to take proper political action and social and medical service.
Specific and effective actions as recommended by WHO, UNICEF, CDC and ISGlobal (47) (48) (49) (50) could be implemented to minimize the predicted COVID-19 moves are as follows.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052928 doi: medRxiv preprint • Eschew to touch different parts (eye, nose, mouth) of your face which facilitate the SARS-CoV-2 be wedged into your body especially its' favorite lower part of the lungs.
Also maintain personal hygiene at your best level by frequent washing your hands.
• Practice to regular use of disposable tissue when sneezing or coughing being COVID-19 a droplet-mediated viral disease and dispose it by maintaining proper disposing manner.
• Avoid the mass gathering and unpopular movement except for buying food and medicines. And when moving outside keep a 1 meter (3 feet) distance, especially when someone next to you is coughing or sneezing and vice-versa.
• The air born nature of the SARS-CoV-2 can be hindered by using consistent and correct use of surgical masksmust disinfect your hands after removing masks and gloves.
• Daily measure own temperature. Pursue medical attention through advance call when got fever, cough or difficult breathing. Therefore, the regional health care authority can provide the right health facility by protecting both the infected ones and other from spreading the virus.
• Install some kind of physical barrier (for example, Plexiglas shield) between the hospital reception staffs and patients. Also make adequate (1 meter) distance between the chairs in the waiting room of the emergency hospital visitors.
• Before making a home-call patient appointment ask do they have a cold, flu symptoms, fever, cough or conjunctivitis. And also ask about the recent contact with people suffering from COVID-19 infection or comes from infected areas. If so, recommend to wait for the visit or to go to the hospital (outpatients service, not emergency room).
• All units of hospitals and patient carrying ambulance will be cleaned regularly by using sterilized products as the virus has transmitted nature from the infected surface.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052928 doi: medRxiv preprint • And the last but not least, a simple message for all countries from the speech of WHO Director General "test, test, test". This is for understating the scale of outbreak and reduce the transmission by following the strategy of test-trace-isolate infected ones.
All predictions, suggestions and efforts made by the researchers and health care professionals in different part of the worlds will frail without the implementation of extensive public health interventions.
WHO . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052928 doi: medRxiv preprint Tables   Table 1 Tryout the equation for predicting COVID-19 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052928 doi: medRxiv preprint Table 6 Probable predicted cases and deaths of COVID-19 after its' first outbreak (January 31, 2020) in Spain based on the trend and exposed number till March . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052928 doi: medRxiv preprint Table 7 Probable predicted cases and deaths of COVID-19 after its' first outbreak (January 31, 2020) in Malaysia based on the trend and exposed number till March . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052928 doi: medRxiv preprint Table 8 Probable predicted cases and deaths of COVID-19 after its' first outbreak (January 31, 2020) in Singapore based on the trend and exposed number till March . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20052928 doi: medRxiv preprint
