The emergence of novel SARS coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in 2019 has triggered an ongoing global pandemic of severe pneumonia-like disease designated as coronavirus disease 2019 . To date, more than 2.1 million confirmed cases and 139,500 deaths have been reported worldwide, and there are currently no medical countermeasures available to prevent or treat the disease. As the development of a vaccine could require at least 12-18 months, and the typical timeline from hit finding to drug registration of an antiviral is >10 years, repositioning of known drugs can significantly accelerate the development and deployment of therapies for COVID-19. To identify therapeutics that can be repurposed as SARS-CoV-2 antivirals, we profiled a library of known drugs encompassing approximately 12,000 clinical-stage or FDAapproved small molecules. Here, we report the identification of 30 known drugs that inhibit viral replication. Of these, six were characterized for cellular dose-activity relationships, and showed effective concentrations likely to be commensurate with therapeutic doses in patients. These include the PIKfyve kinase inhibitor Apilimod, cysteine protease inhibitors MDL-28170, Z LVG CHN2, VBY-825, and ONO 5334, and the CCR1 antagonist MLN-3897. Since many of these molecules have advanced into the clinic, the known pharmacological and human safety profiles of these compounds will accelerate their preclinical and clinical evaluation for COVID-19 treatment.
author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
In December 2019, the novel SARS coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) was identified as the causative agent of a severe pneumonia-like coronavirus disease (COVID- 19) outbreak in Wuhan in the Hubei province of China 1 . SARS-CoV-2 is an enveloped, positive-sense, single-stranded RNA betacoronavirus, related to the viruses that caused Notably, the levels of IL-6 have been reported to correlate with respiratory failure, and inhibitors are currently being pursued in clinical studies for the amelioration of virusinduced inflammatory responses 7 . Patients with pre-existing chronic conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, and asthma, as well as those 65 years or older, are at a higher risk of severe disease outcome 8 . The underlying basis for these differential outcomes is yet unknown. Together, the still accelerating rate of community transmission and severity of the symptoms have placed an unprecedented burden on the medical supply chain and health care system in Italy, Spain, and the U.S. [9] [10] [11] , with similar scenarios playing out or anticipated in other countries.
While the FDA has recently granted the antimalarial drug hydroxychloroquine sulfate (also known as hydroxychloroquine) emergency use authorization (EUA) for COVID-19 treatment, at present, there is no vaccine or approved antiviral therapeutic agent available 12 . Thus, there is an urgent and critical need to identify novel medical countermeasures both for prophylactic and treatment use. Since the production of a vaccine could take 12-18 months 13 , and de novo development of therapies usually requires 10-17 years 14 , repositioning clinically evaluated drugs represents one of the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16 .044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint most practicable strategies for the rapid identification and deployment of treatments for emerging infectious diseases such as Toward this end, in addition to many anti-immune treatments not addressed in this paper, many investigational clinical trials using repurposed drugs for evaluation of direct antiviral activity have already been launched. Those include multiple antiviral and antimalarial medicines. Early results of a multicenter trial in China suggested that the antimalarial drug, chloroquine, may limit exacerbation of pneumonia and shorten viral replication and course of disease 15 . A French study that used hydroxychloroquine together with azithromycin reported a significant reduction in viral load in COVID-19 patients when used in combination 16 . However, a sufficiently powered case-control study has not yet been reported, and thus it is unclear if there are therapeutic benefits of chloroquine administration to SARS-CoV-2-infected patients, although several concerns are being raised recently, due to the severe cardiac complications potentially resulting from the use of this treatment in COVID-19 patients 17, 18 .
The repurposing of several approved antiviral therapies have all been the focus of clinical investigations, including HIV-1 protease inhibitors lopinavir/ritonavir (Kaletra, Aluvia by AbbVie) 19 , hepatitis C virus protease inhibitor danoprevir (Ganovo, Ascletis Pharma) 20 , and the influenza antiviral favipiravir (T-705, Avigan) 21 . Most notably, ten clinical trials at more than 50 global sites are underway to investigate remdesivir (GS-5734), an investigational antiviral originally developed by Gilead Sciences to treat Ebola virus infection 22 . Remdesivir, an adenosine analogue, is a viral RNA polymerase inhibitor that causes premature termination of transcription when incorporated into nascent viral RNA 23 . The drug has demonstrated in vitro and in vivo activity in animal models against both MERS and SARS 24, 25 , as well as potent antiviral activity in Vero E6 against a clinical isolate of SARS-CoV-2 26 . Pending results of several randomized (n = 308) clinical trials are expected to provide definitive insight into the efficacy of remdesivir as a therapeutic solution for the treatment of COVID-19. However, a wellpowered randomized controlled trial has yet to demonstrate definitive evidence of antiviral efficacy for remdesivir or any other potential therapeutic.
While these targeted repurposing strategies provide potentially rapid trajectories toward an approved treatment, an unbiased large-scale evaluation of known drugs and author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint clinical candidates can identify additional unanticipated therapeutic options with accelerated evaluation for the treatment of COVID-19 disease. Here, we describe a high-throughput repositioning screen using the commercial library of 1,280 pharmacologically active compounds LOPAC®1280 and the ReFRAME (Repurposing, Focused Rescue, and Accelerated Medchem) drug collection, a comprehensive openaccess library of ~12,000 clinical-staged or approved small molecules respectively, to identify existing drugs that harbor antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2 in a cell-based assay 27, 28 . The ReFRAME library has previously been used to successfully identify the anti-inflammatory auranofin as a potential therapy for tuberculosis 29 , the approved drug clofazimine as a potent antiparasitic compound that is now being tested for efficacy against Cryptosporidium 30 , and has also been used to identify and optimize the FDAapproved antifungal drug itraconazole as a novel efficacious molecule suitable for chronic administration as an anti-fibrotic 31 . Importantly, the ReFRAME library is unique in that it is the only repurposing collection we are aware of where nearly 50% of the library was derived from custom synthesis, as commercially available sources of these clinical molecules were not available 32 . Each of the molecules in this collection has been previously optimized for efficacy, safety, and bioavailability. Therefore, this enables leveraging of the considerable investment in research and development to compress the timeline required for drug discovery and development 33 . For example, repositioning is estimated to reduce the typical 10-17 year development process to 3-12 years 34 , and under emergency use authorization (EUA) for chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN) threats during public health emergencies, such as the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, this may be abbreviated to a <6-month time frame.
Here, we describe a high-throughput analysis of the ReFRAME library to identify inhibitors of SARS-CoV-2 replication in mammalian cells, and identified several targets and mechanistic classes that were highly enriched, including aldose reductase inhibitors, retinoic acid receptor antagonists, benzodiazepine receptor agonists, regulators of cholesterol homeostasis and antimalarial compounds. Validation studies further confirmed 30 known drugs to inhibit viral replication, including four molecules previously approved by the FDA (clofazimine, acitretin, tretinoin, and astemizole) or registered outside the US (tamibarotene). Dose response studies have thus far author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint characterized 7 compounds that exhibit a range of effective concentrations (EC 50 ) that are consistent with potential clinical efficacy. These include a PIKfyve kinase inhibitor that has reached Phase II clinical trials (Apilimod), and cysteine protease inhibitors (MDL-28170, Z LVG CHN2, VBY-825, and ONO 5334) that are in various phases of preclinical and clinical development. In addition, the preclinical ion channel blocker AMG-2674 and the ion channer blocker and antimalarial drug hanfangchin A, the phase I proton pump inhibitor YH-1238, as well as the G-protein receptor antagonists MLN-3897 and SDZ-62-434 35 , which are in phase II and phase I clinical evaluation respectively, were also found to possess antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2. Rapid experimental and clinical evaluation of these therapeutics for in vivo antiviral efficacy and amelioration of disease-associated pathologies can provide an important opportunity for the accelerated development of potential therapies for COVID-19 treatment.
SARS-CoV-2 HKU-001a strain was isolated from the nasopharyngeal aspirate specimen of a laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 patient in Hong Kong 36 . SARS-CoV-2 USA-WA1/2020 strain, isolated from an oropharyngeal swab from a patient with a respiratory illness who developed clinical disease in January 2020 in Washington, USA, was obtained from BEI Resources (NR-52281). The virus was propagated in Vero E6 (ATCC® CRL-1586™) cells transfected with exogenous human ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and stored at −80 °C in aliquots. Plaque forming unit (PFU) and TCID 50 assays were performed to titrate the cultured virus. Vero E6 and Huh-7 cells (Apath LLC, Brooklyn) were maintained in Dulbecco's modified eagle medium (DMEM, Gibco) supplemented with 10 % heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco), 50 U/mL penicillin, 50 µg/mL streptomycin, 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Gibco), 10 mM HEPES (Gibco), and 1X MEM non-essential amino acids solution (Gibco). Huh-7 cells were transfected with PLVX-ACE2 and PLX304-TMPRSS2 prior to infection. All experiments involving live SARS-CoV-2 followed the approved standard operating author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint procedures of the Biosafety Level 3 facility at the University of Hong Kong 37 and Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute.
The LOPAC®1280 library is a collection of 1,280 pharmacologically active compounds, covering all the major target classes, including kinases, GPCRs, neurotransmission and gene regulation (Sigma). The ReFRAME (Repurposing, Focused Rescue, and 
Compounds from the LOPAC®1280 and ReFRAME library were transferred into F-BOTTOM, µCLEAR®, BLACK 384-well plates (Greiner) using an Echo 550 Liquid Handler (Labcyte). All compounds were diluted in culture media to a final concentration of 5 µM during screening. Briefly, Vero E6 cells were seeded in 384-well plates, on top of pre-spotted compounds, at a density of 3,000 cells per well in 40 µl using a microFlo™ select dispenser (BioTek Instruments). Sixteen hours post-seeding, the cells were infected by adding 10 µl of SARS-CoV-2 per well at an MOI of 0.01. Cytopathic effect (CPE) was indirectly quantified as the presence of ATP in live cells by using the CellTiter-Glo (Promega) luminescent cell viability assay at 72 hours post-infection. Data were normalized to the median of each plate. For the ReFRAME library, the Z-score was calculated based on the log2FC with the average and standard deviation of each plate. The screen was performed in duplicate by running the assay in parallel for the LOPAC®1280 library or as two independent experiments for the ReFRAME collection.
Twenty-eight compounds from the LOPAC®1280 were selected according to the cutoff of >5*Stdev Log2FC and included in a dose-response confirmation assay. Compounds author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint from the ReFRAME collection were ranked according to their Z-score. The top 100 hits from each replicate were selected (25 overlapping). Seventy-five additional hits were chosen according to their ranking based on the average Z-score. The last 48 hits were selected according to drug target and pathway enrichment analysis. The 298 prioritized hits were included in a dose-response confirmation assay.
The selected hits were further validated by immunofluorescence in an 8-point dose response experiment to determine EC 50 After blocking with 3 % bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 30 min, the cells were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature with rabbit-anti-SARS-CoV-1 nucleoprotein serum, which exhibits strong cross-reactivity with SARS-CoV-2. After two washes with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), the cells were incubated with Alexa Fluor 488conjugated goat-anti-rabbit IgG (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) for 1 hour at room temperature. After two additional washes, PBS supplemented with 0.1 µg/ml antifade-4 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (BioLegend, USA) was added to the cells for at least 30 min before imaging. Images were acquired using the Celigo Image Cytometer (Nexcelom). The assay results and data analysis enabled us to determine infectivity and viability/cytotoxicity. Based on all infectivity and cytotoxicity values, a 4-parameter logistic non-linear regression model was used to calculate EC 50 and CC 50 concentration values.
Compounds were annotated in the three databases used to assemble the ReFRAME library (Clarivate Integrity, GVK Excelra GoStar and Citeline Pharmaprojects) according author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint to a variety of properties, including targets, pathways, indications, and mechanisms of actions (MOA). Each annotation property was tested for enrichment among the screening hits using the GSEA software 38, 39 . The compounds annotated for each property were treated as a "gene set". For each set of vendor annotations, the background compound set was defined as the set of compounds annotated for any property by that vendor. Enrichment results at p < 0.05 and FDR q-value < 0.25 were defined as significant. Additional enrichment analyses were performed using the free online meta-analysis tool Metascape 40 .
Gene expression analysis was conducted using single-cell RNA profiling data of samples from four macro-anatomical locations of human airway epithelium in healthy living volunteers 41 were generated in R using the pheatmap and viridis packages.
Replication. One of the most efficient ways to identify antiviral candidates against an emergent virus, such as SARS-CoV-2, that can be rapidly evaluated in clinical trials is to repurpose clinically assessed drugs. Given the urgent need for therapeutics to treat SARS-CoV-2 infection, we developed a high-throughput assay to screen a comprehensive repurposing library. Vero E6 cells, kidney epithelial cells derived from an African green monkey, have been shown to be highly permissive to SARS-CoV-2 infection 42 and viral replication can be assessed through measurement of viral-induced cytopathic effects (CPE) 43 . A clinical isolate of the SARS-CoV-2 virus (SARS-CoV-2 author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint HKU-001a) 36 was utilized for assay development and screening. The assay parameters, including cell seeding density, multiplicity of infection (MOI), and timepoints, were optimized in Vero E6 cells by measuring virus-induced CPE using CellTiter-glo, which quantifies cellular ATP levels, in a 384-well format. Maximal dynamic range and reproducibility were found at conditions of 3,000 cells/well, infection at an MOI of 0.01, and CPE measurement at 72 hours post-infection ( Figure 1A ; data not shown).
In an effort to assess robustness and reproducibility of the optimized assay in a high-throughput screening (HTS) configuration, we initially evaluated the assay utilizing Duplicates of each plate were run in parallel and the value corresponding to each well was normalized to the median of each plate and used to calculate the log base 2 of the fold change (Log2FC). Based on the activity of APY0201, the average Zʹ factor for the 5 plates in duplicate was 0.4, and the correlation coefficient for the duplicates (R 2 ) was 0.81 ( Figure 1B) , although an usual distribution of the positive controls in the correlation plot was observed. Twenty-eight compounds were selected for further study based on activities in both screens. These included the HIV protease inhibitor nelfinavir mesylate hydrate, the calpain and cathepsin B inhibitor MDL28170 and the antagonist of the serotonin receptors 5-HT1B and 5-HT1D GR 127935 hydrochloride hydrate, which have author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint all been shown to efficiently block either SARS-CoV-1 or 2 infection in vitro or in vivo [46] [47] [48] [49] [50] , thus assessing the sensitivity of our screening conditions in identifying compounds with known antiviral activity ( Figure 1B, top right middle panel) .
Repositioning analysis of the ReFRAME Drug Repurposing Library. Since the results of the LOPAC®1280 HTS analysis indicated that these assay conditions were suitable to progress to a large-scale screen, we used this experimental design to screen the comprehensive ReFRAME drug repurposing collection. This library is an inclusive collection of nearly 12,000 chemical compounds, that have been either FDA-approved or registered outside the US, entered clinical trials, or undergone significant pre-clinical characterization 27 . Specifically, 11,987 compounds were arrayed in 384-well plates at a final concentration of 5 µM. As with the previous assay, Vero E6 cells were seeded into each well pre-spotted with compound, infected 16 h later with SARS-CoV-2 (MOI = 0.01) and at 72 hours post-infection, CPE was determined. Analysis of the average Zʹ factor calculated on the activity of APY0201 was determined to be 0.51, reflecting an acceptable assay dynamic range ( Figure 1C, left panel) . The screen was then repeated as an independent replicate and the correlation coefficient (R 2 ) for the two replicates was determined to be 0.68 ( Figure 1C Based on a nominal P-value cutoff of 0.05 and FDR q-value < 0.25, we found that author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint enriched targets and biological processes include allosteric modulators of the benzodiazepine and retinoic receptors, cytosolic NADPH-dependent oxidoreductase aldose reductase, potassium channels, cholesterol homeostasis, and serine proteases.
Antimalarials including chloroquine derivatives (i.e. Amopyroquine and AQ-13) were also enriched, although the FDR q-value was below the established threshold (0.33) (Figure 2A ; Figure S2 and Table S2 ).
SARS-CoV-2 primarily infects the epithelial cells in the respiratory tract 53 . To elucidate the expression pattern of the genes that have been annotated to be targeted by putative antiviral compounds, we compared the expression of drug target genes enriched in the compound screen across cell types within the respiratory tract 41 .
Although both the entry receptor for SARS-CoV-2, ACE2, and the priming protease TMPRSS2, were found to be expressed within specific anatomical sampling locations in the respiratory tract ( Figure 2B, left heatmap) , ACE2 expression was found to be restricted to epithelial cell types including multiciliated, nasal, deuterosomal, secretory, and basal cells ( Figure 2B, right heatmap) . Nonetheless, ACE2 expression has been reported to be induced by type-I interferon 90 . Notably, a majority of the mapped targets of active compounds also harbored expression in relevant respiratory epithelial cells, suggesting these may be physiologically relevant drug targets ( Figure 2B) . Further pathway analyses of these enriched MOAs and targets revealed enrichment in genes involved in nuclear receptor pathways, GPCR ligand binding and signaling, and calcium signaling ( Figure S3) , underscoring the potential critical role of these molecular circuits in cellular control of the SARS-CoV-2 life cycle 40 .
candidates for validation studies, compounds were ranked according to their Z-score in the primary screen ( Figure S1 ), and 100 compounds from replicate 1 were prioritized based on this ranking, and an additional 75 molecules were selected that were only found in replicate 2. 75 compounds were also selected according to their ranking calculated based on the average Z-score between the replicates, and an additional 48 author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint hits were chosen because they were classified within an enriched drug target and pathway class (see above).
We initially assessed the activity of hits at half the original screening concentration (2.5 µM) using an orthogonal assay readout. Specifically, Vero E6 cells were pre-incubated with each compound dilution for 16 
Although specific for each compound, therapeutic dose ranges are typically expected to track to cellular EC 50 s well below 1 µM concentrations. Therefore, we conducted a dose response analysis to determine the relationship between compound concentration and antiviral activity. Compound concentrations tested ranged from 1.1 nM to 2.5 µM in the immunofluorescence assay described previously. Total cell counts were used to assess compound cytotoxicity ( Figure S4 ). In addition to remdesivir, treatment with 17 compounds resulted in discernable dose-dependent antiviral activities, most of which could be segregated based on broad functional, structural, or target-based classes (Figure 3A) . 10 of these known drugs have EC 50 s > 750 nM or values that could not be exactly extrapolated (Figures 3A and   Figure S5 ), while 7 compounds harbored EC 50 s < 500 nM (6 of which reached > 80% author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint inhibiton of the infection at the highest concentration (Figure 3B-C) ), suggesting that effective antiviral potency could likely be achieved during therapeutic dosing of a COVID-19 patient. Data are also available at reframedb.org.
To enable prioritization of known drugs for preclinical and clinical evaluation for the treatment of SARS-CoV-2, a summary of the publicly disclosed and relevant preclinical and clinical properties of the most advanced among these molecules are annotated in Table 1 (information retrieved from CortellisTM (Clarivate Analytics) and drugs.com).
Since the beginning of January 2020, an extraordinary number of investigational programs and clinical trials has been initiated in a concerted effort to identify therapeutics against the rapidly growing COVID-19 pandemic. Clinical trials using repurposed clinical-stage or approved drugs such as remdesivir, favipiravir, lopinavir/ritonavir, hydroxychloroquine and others have been under investigation for treating COVID-19 patients 15, 16, 20, [54] [55] [56] [57] [58] [59] . Some other therapies, such as treatment with antibodies from seroconverted idividuals, are also being investigated. However, most of the reported studies have been conducted in small cohorts and thus should be considered preliminary, with larger case-control clinical evaluations still pending [15] [16] [19] [20] [21] [22] The elucidation of additional candidate therapies would greatly enhance the probability of rapidly identifying safe and efficacious treatment options, and would also enable the development of combinatorial regimens ("cocktails"), which reflects the current treatment strategies for HIV-1 and hepatitis C virus (HCV) [60] [61] [62] .
Large-scale surveys of existing drugs that may harbor antiviral activities can significantly facilitate such repositioning efforts. A recently reported SARS-CoV-2human protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis identified 332 viral-host interactions, 66 of which are potential druggable human host factors targeted by 69 known drugs that have FDA approval, however activities on SARS-CoV-2 replication have not yet been reported 63 . An additional study that tested a focused panel of 48 FDA-approved drugs, previously shown to have antiviral activity against both SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint also demonstrated that several known drugs harbor potent antiviral activities against SARS-CoV-2 64 .
Here, we report the high-throughput analysis of approximately 12,000 known drugs evaluated for activity against SARS-CoV-2 replication. The assay, conducted in Vero E6 cells was designed to capture multicycle replication, based upon low viral input (MOI = 0.01) and an extended endpoint measurement (72 hours post-infection).
Although cell-based assays can be biased towards capturing inhibitors of viral entry, the assay was constructed to interrogate each step of the viral life cycle. Of note, one potential limitation of Vero cells is that, due to species differences, pro-drugs that require the human host cell machinery for processing into their active form, such as some nucleoside inhibitors, may not harbor the same potency as in human cells.
Consistently, we found that remdesivir inhibits SARS-CoV-2 replication ~60-fold more potently in human cells in comparison to Vero E6 cells ( Figure 3A and Figure S5 ; data not shown).
The dynamic range of the viral-induced CPE in the assay was small (~2-2.5 fold), but robust and reproducible ( Figure 1B) . Both the optimization using the LOPAC® 1280library and the first ReFRAME collection screen displayed acceptable Zʹ factors (0.4 and 0.51, respectively). The duplicate ReFRAME screen, had a reduced dynamic range (1.5-fold) and corresponding Zʹ factor (0. 19) . Although the correlation between the two ReFRAME replications was high (R 2 =0.68), there were compounds that were found active in replicate 1, but not replicate 2 ( Figure 1C , bottom right of middle panel). While we leveraged all datasets to select molecules for further validation, compound selection was weighted for replicate 1. Specifically, in addition to 28 molecules from the LOPAC®1280 library, 250 drugs were selected based on their activity. 48 additional ones, belonging to enriched target/MOA sets based on GSEA analysis, were also included.
These selected compounds were tested in an orthogonal assay that directly measures viral replication, in contrast to the indirect measurement of replication assessed by CPE. Here, we took advantage of a high-throughput immunofluorescence assay that monitors infection levels as reflected by SARS-CoV-2 N protein expression at a single cell resolution. Importantly, this validation step enables the separation of author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint molecules that function to block CPE (i.e. cell death), instead of direct effects on replication. This assay was found to be most robust at a 24-hour timepoint using an MOI of 0.75, thus, the antiviral activities of compounds were not interrogated under the original MOI or 72-hour timepoint conditions. Both the earlier timepoint and higher MOI likely biased the validation screen towards the confirmation of early stage inhibitors.
Consistent with this hypothesis, we found that several molecules with potent EC 50 s were only able to inhibit replication to approximately 50-60 % at multiple high concentrations, including MLN-3897, YH-1238 and SL-11128 ( Figure 3A and Figure S5 ). While this may represent the maximal ability of these molecules to suppress viral replication, alternatively, analysis of these molecules utilizing lower MOIs at later timepoint may reveal greater inhibition of infection. In addition, validation assays were conducted employing drug concentrations that were half of what was utilized in the screen (2.5 µM versus 5 µM) and using a second isolate of SARS-CoV-2. The introduction of these stringencies during the validation step, as well as false positive activities from the HTS assay, likely account for ~30 % confirmation rate observed at this step of the analysis.
Tretinoin, clofazimine, acitretin were amongst the notable validated compounds, since they have been approved by the FDA. Clofazimine is a lipophilic riminophenazine antibiotic, with described antimycobacterial and anti-inflammatory activity 65 used for the treatment of leprosy. Main adverse effects include changes in skin pigmentation, nausea and vomiting. The antibacterial activity of clofazimine is described to be related to its ability to bind to the bacterial DNA. Interestingly, this compound was also identified as a potent antiparasitic drug active against Cryptosporidium, during a repurposing screen of the ReFRAME library 30 . Further studies are required to understand the mechanism by which this molecule blocks the replication of this positive-strand RNA virus, and determination of the dose-response relationship for clofazimine will enable assessment of whether antiviral efficacy can be achieved at therapeutic doses. Acitretin is an approved orally bioavailable retinoid used for the treatment of psoriasis 66 .
Tretinoin, together with tamibarotene, which is registered in Japan, as well as LGD-155, tamibarotene, tazarotene and RBAD, were all validated compounds belonging to the enriched GSEA class of class of retinoic acid agonists highly enriched in the GSEA analysis (Figure 2A) . It is currently unclear how the activation of the transcriptional author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint program governed by retinoic acid receptors may impinge upon SARS-CoV-2 replication.
Six additional compounds which confirmed in our validation studies also modulate targets that were enriched in the high-throughput screen. Those include aldose reductase inhibitor AL 3151, the benzodiazepine receptor agonists ZK-93426, zaleplon GR and pagoclone, and the two antimalarial drugs AQ-13 and hanfangchin A.
Antimalarial drugs have been reported to effectively block several viral infections 67 , including SARS-CoV-2 26 . However, the activities of many of these, in particular chloroquine derivatives, have not been recapitulated in clinical trials 17, 18 . Drugs belonging to this class are generally reported to be less effective in blocking viral infections compared to their anti-malarial activity, with EC 50 generally in a µM range 67 .
The concentration required for their antiviral activity could thus likely be difficult to reach in humans, without causing adverse effects. Taken together, confirmation of compounds with membership in enriched target classes underscore the importance of these molecular circuits in the regulation of SARS-CoV-2 replication and support the evaluation of additional preclinical and clinical stage molecules that target overrepresented mechanisms.
Among the 17 compounds validated to show a dose-response relationship in our orthogonal assay, 10 compounds harbored EC 50 antiviral activities >750 nM, suggesting that additional preclinical studies will likely be required to determine whether administration of these compounds can achieve sufficient systemic exposure to enable antiviral activity (Figure S5) . Seven molecules were found to inhibit viral replication at EC 50 concentration <500 nM. These include Z LVG CHN2, a preclinical tripeptide derivative that displays a broad-spectrum bactericidal activity. Specifically, this molecule has been previously shown to suppress herpes simplex virus (HSV) replication by inhibiting the enzymatic activity of HSV-encoded cysteine protease 68 , which may indicate that the antiviral function of Z LVG CHN2 occurs through inhibition of SARS-COV-2 3CLpro protease. Another preclinical molecule that exhibits strong antiviral activity, MDL 28170, is a potent cell permeable calpain I and II inhibitor. Interestingly, MDL 28170 was previously found to impair infection by SARS-COV-1 and Ebola virus (EBOV) 50, 69 . Additionally, astemizole a registered anti-histamine H1 receptor antagonist author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint that also reported to have anti-malarial properties 70 , inhibited replication at an EC 50 concentration of ~1.1 µM. Due to fatal arrhythmias when given in high doses or in combination with certain other common drugs, astemizole has been withdrawn in many countries 71 . Therefore, thorough safety studies are required to determine if there exists a sufficient therapeutic index for the acute treatment of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
MLN-3897 (AVE-9897) is an orally active chemokine CCR1 antagonist and was evaluated in phase II clinical studies for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and multiple sclerosis (MS) 72 , showing a dose of 10 mg once daily was well tolerated 73 . It was determined to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 replication at an estimated EC 50 concentration of 140 nM (Figure 2) , and the C max of the compound has been reported at 9.0 nM (10 mg QD). Therefore, additional in vivo studies will be required to determine if sufficient systemic concentrations can be reached to promote antiviral activities. The mechanism by which CCR1 antagonism inhibits SARS-CoV-2 infection requires further investigation. However, it has been reported that CCR1 inhibition with MLN-3897 potentially blocks ERK phosphorylation, leading to suppression of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (Raf/MEK/ERK) signal transduction pathway 74 . Interestingly, Raf/MEK/ERK signaling pathways are employed by SARS-CoV-1 to support its replication via multiple well-documented mechanisms 75, 76 , and thus this signaling axis may also represent a critical therapeutic target for host-directed SARS-CoV-2 antivirals.
Human cysteinyl cathepsins, including cathepsin B, cathepsin L, and cathepsin K, are required for the proteolytic processing of virally encoded proteins during infection [77] [78] [79] . Cathepsin activity seems to be required for proper processing of the SARS-CoV-1 S protein within the endosome in order to activate its fusogenic acitivity 78 .
Inhibition of cathepsin L activity has been previously shown to efficiently suppress SARS-CoV-1 infection 78 . We found ONO 5334 (a cathepsin K inhibitor) and VBY-825 (a reversible cathepsin protease inhibitor) to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection in a dosedependent manner, however additional studies will be required to determine if their antiviral activities are due to inhibiting proteolysis of viral or host cellular proteins. ONO 5334 harbored an antiviral EC50 of ~500 nM, which is in range of a previously reported 85 % activity observed at 100 nM in an osteoclast-mediated bone resorption assay 80 .
Importantly, the Cmax of this compound is 1.6 µM (300 mg QD), and treatment with author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint ONO-5334 was well tolerated up to daily doses of 300 mg and for up to 12 months without any clinically relevant safety concerns. ONO5334 reached phase II clinical trials for the treatment of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women, but development was discontinued due to an unfavorable competitive landscape 81, 82 . VBY-825, which is in preclinical development, is another cathepsin inhibitor harboring potential antiviral activities against SARS-CoV-2 with an EC50 of ~300 nM, and it shows high potency against cathepsins B, L, S and V in vitro 83 . Overall, the identification of VBY-825 and ONO 5334 as effective antiviral molecules against SAR-COV-2 supports the repositioning of these, and potentially additional protease inhibitors, for the treatment of COVID-19 disease.
Finally, apilimod, a specific PIKfyve kinase inhibitor, was found to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 replication at an EC 50 concentration of 23 nM (Figure 3) . Importantly, apilimod is found to be well tolerated in humans showing a desirable safety profile at doses of ≤ 125 mg BID, and the Cmax of this compound is 0.265 +/-0.183 µM (70 mg QD) 84, 85 .
These data indicate that therapeutic dosing of apilimod in patients can achieve concentrations that are likely to promote antiviral activity. Apilimod has been evaluated in phase II clinical trials for the treatment of active Crohn's disease and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 86 , and in additional phase II trials for the oral treatment of common variable immunodeficiency (CVID), but did not show efficacy for these indications 85, 87 . In 2019, orphan drug designation was granted to apilimod in the U.S. for the treatment of follicular lymphoma 88 , with phase I clinical trials ongoing. Notably, it has been reported that apilimod efficiently inhibits EBOV, Lassa virus (LASV), and Marburg virus (MARV) in human cell lines, underscoring its potential broad-spectrum antiviral activity 44, 89 . The underlying mechanism for the inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 infection by apilimod is currently not known. However, since PIKfyve predominately resides in early endosomes and plays an essential role in maintenance of endomembrane homeostasis, apilimod likely blocks viral low pH-dependent entry through inhibition of the lipid kinase activity of PIKfyve.
Taken together, this study has illuminated a compendium of druggable targets, pathways, biological processes and small molecules that modulate the SARS-CoV-2 replication cycle. These data can be leveraged to focus studies aimed at deciphering author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint the biology of this coronavirus, and to guide additional directed repurposing studies, particularly of existing late-stage preclinical assets. Critically, this campaign led to the identification and validation of 30 molecules with antiviral activities against SARS-CoV-2, including four FDA-approved compounds, one drug registered in Japan, and 11 molecules that have entered clinical trials. The availability of human safety and pharmacological data of these molecules is expected to enable rapid preclinical and clinical assessment of these compounds. However, expedited regulatory review under EUA guidelines also provides a rationale for the development of earlier stage candidate molecules that can be deployed for use during this current pandemic outbreak. It is critical that multiple therapeutic options that demonstrate efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 are available to mitigate potential emergence of drug resistance, as well as enable the evaluation of optimal therapeutic cocktails that are broadly curative for COVID-19 disease.
The following reagent was deposited by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
Activity and clinical profiles of compounds with confirmed dose-activity relationships that have entered into clinical evaluation.
Drug targets enriched in GSEA analysis of HTS data.
FDA-approved or GSEA-enriched compounds.
author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.044016 doi: bioRxiv preprint 
