Recently a novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) emerged from Wuhan, China and has infected more than 571000 people leading to more than 26000 deaths. Since SARS-CoV-2 genome sequences show similarity with those of SARS, we sought to analyze all the available SARS-CoV-2 genomes based on the insights obtained from SARS genome specifically focusing on non-coding RNAs.
Here, results are presented from the dual approach i.e identifying host encoded miRNAs that might regulate viral pathogenesis as well as identifying viral encoded miRNAs that might regulate host cell signaling pathways and aid in viral pathogenesis. Analysis utilizing first approach resulted in the identification of 10 host encoded miRNAs that could target the genome of both the viruses (SARS-CoV-2 and SARS reference genome). Interestingly our analysis revealed that there is significantly higher number of host miRNAs that could target SARS-CoV-2 genome as compared to the SARS reference genome. Results from second approach involving SARS-CoV-2 and SARS reference genome identified a set of virus encoded miRNAs which might regulate host signaling pathways. Our analysis further identified a similar "GA" rich motif in SARS-CoV-2 genome that was shown to play a vital role in lung pathogenesis during severe SARS infections. Hence, we successfully identified human and virus encoded miRNAs that might regulate pathogenesis of both these coronaviruses and the fact that more number of host miRNAs could target SARS-CoV-2 genomes possibly reveal as to why this virus follows mild pathogenesis in healthy individuals. We identified non-coding sequences in SARS-CoV-2 genomes that were earlier reported to contribute towards SARS pathology. The study provides insights into the overlapping sequences among these viruses for their effective inhibition as well as identifying new drug targets that could be used for development of new antivirals. : bioRxiv preprint the genomes of SARS-CoV-2 and SARS for identification of any common virus encoded miRNA.
Contrary to our expectation, we did not find any virus encoded miRNA which was common to forward and reverse genomes of SARS and SARS- CoV-2 (fig 1e) .
Recently, deep sequencing based approaches were used to identify SARS encoded non-coding RNAs which were then shown to play a critical role in SARS induced lung pathology [5]. The authors successfully identified a set of non-coding RNAs that were produced during SARS infections. The authors further characterized a "GA" rich region that was enriched in non-coding RNAs produced during SARS infection. Hence, we aimed to analyse SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequences for the identification of similar non-coding RNAs with a rationale that presence of the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Coronaviruses are the group of enveloped viruses with positive-sense single stranded RNA as the genetic material. These viruses cause mild to severe respiratory and intestinal infections in immune MicroRNAs are known to regulate diverse biological pathways including various steps in viral replication [6] . Hence, we studied the role of host miRNAs in regulating viral replication by predicting the host miRNA binding sites among the genome of these viruses. In order to gain in depth understanding into the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2, we analysed all genomes of SARS-CoV-2 (n=52) that were available for download till 07 March 2020 (Supplementary figure 1). SARS reference genome was used for comparison and the analysis was performed on both the forward and reverse sequences of viral genomes. For prediction of host miRNAs that could bind to viral genomes, miRDB algorithm was used [7] [8] . The analysis was performed in custom mode where user defined sequences can be uploaded and processed. All the analysis were done at default settings and only those miRNAs were studied further that had a target score >= 80. Using this approach, around 263 and 196 host miRNAs were identified that could target each of the forward and reverse SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequences (Fig1a, Supplementary table 2). Similar analysis on SARS reference genome identified 174 and 120 host miRNAs that could bind to forward and reverse sequences respectively (Fig1a, Supplementary table 2) . The analysis further revealed that number of host miRNAs targeting SARS-CoV-2 genomes (both forward and reverse genomes) were significantly higher as compared to number of miRNAs targeting SARS reference genome.
Despite the dissimilarity among number of host miRNAs targeting viral genomes, we observed that the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.31.018499 doi: bioRxiv preprint 86 common host miRNAs could target all the SARS-CoV-2 forward and SARS forward reference genome whereas 61 common host miRNAs were found to be targeting all the SARS-CoV-2 and SARS reverse genome (Supplementary table 3) . Comparison of all the forward and reverse sequences of SARS-CoV-2 and SARS reference genome revealed 10 host miRNAs that could target all the genomes being studied and hence could be potentially used as broad acting antivirals (Fig   1b, 1c) .
Several viruses have been shown to regulate host signaling pathways by encoding miRNAs in their genomes. Hence, in order to gain insights into various miRNAs encoded by genomes of SARS-CoV-2 and SARS coronaviruses, a set of computational tools were used to predict miRNAs encoded by these viruses. Since hairpin loops forms the precursor of small RNAs, miRNAFold algorithm was used first to predict loops in viral genomes [9, 10] . The algorithm predicted around 574 and 550 hairpin loops in each SARS-CoV-2 forward and reverse genomes respectively, 573 and 575 hairpin loops in SARS forward and reverse genome respectively. Since all hairpin loops does not result in functional miRNAs, miRBoost algorithm was then used to identify whether the hairpin structures could yield functional microRNA or not [11] . The algorithm successfully predicted around 66 miRNAs in each of SARS-CoV-2 forward genome, 64 miRNAs in each of SARS-CoV-2 reverse genome, 89 miRNAs in SARS forward genome and 79 miRNAs in SARS reverse genome. Using the above mentioned algorithms we successfully identified some of the potential viral encoded miRNAs which can be used by the viruses to modulate host signaling pathways. Then we utilized mirBase algorithm to study whether our predicted miRNAs had any similarity to human encoded miRNAs or not [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] . Interestingly, we observed that out of 65 sequences that were predicted by miRBoost, mirBase identified 56 miRNAs in SARS-CoV-2 forward genome sequence that matched to human specific miRNAs. Similarly out of 64 miRNAs predicted in SARS-CoV-2 reverse genome, 39 matched to human specific miRNAs. The algorithm further matched 66 and 33 miRNAs to humans from a repertoire of 89 and 79 predicted miRNAs among forward and reverse SARS genomes (fig 1d, Supplementary sheet 4) . We then compared all similar sequences in SARS-CoV-2 might predict about the pathogenesis of the virus. Our approach revealed presence of a very similar "GA" stretch in SARS-CoV-2 which was reported in be enriched in SARS encoded non-coding RNAs. We then analyzed SARS-CoV-2 genomes for the presence of non-coding RNAs that were shown to be produced in during SARS pathology. Our comparative analysis of both viral genomes revealed that SARS-CoV-2 had very similar stretches compared to SARS encoded non-coding RNAs (figure 2). Interestingly, it was also observed that all the 52 SARS-CoV-2 genomes were highly conserved in the regions that encoded non-coding RNAs suggesting their critical role in viral pathology.
To summarize, our study identified various host and viral encoded miRNAs that could potentially regulate viral pathogenesis. We further observed that SARS-CoV-2 genomes had binding sites for the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.31.018499 doi: bioRxiv preprint
