Repurposing existing drugs is a timely option to cope with COVID-19. We predicted therapeutic candidates that could reverse the gene expression of coronavirus-infected host cells. Thirteen expression signatures computed from various experimental conditions and preclinical models could be reversed by those compounds known to be effective against SARS-or MERS-CoV, as well as the drug candidates recently shown to be effective against SARS-CoV-2. We selected ten novel candidates to further evaluate their in vitro efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 infection. Four compounds bortezomib, dactolisib, alvocidib and methotrexate inhibited the formation of virus infection-induced cytopathic effect in Vero E6 cells at 1 µM, yet such a concentration seems toxic to the cells as well. While the evaluation in other permissive cells and
the prediction of toxicity are needed to optimize and minimize their antiviral activity and cytotoxicity, respectively, this computational approach has the potential to rapidly and rationally identify drug candidates against COVID-19.
Since early December 2019, the newly emerged SARS-CoV-2 has infected almost 1 million people globally 1 . In the United States, confirmed cases increased from a few dozen to almost 1000 within two weeks, and this number rapidly grew to over 80,000 within one month 2 . Among the patients, 15% suffered from severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and approximately 3% died from acute respiratory failure, acute cardiac injury, secondary infection, and other serious complications 1, 3, 4 
Organization (WHO) declared this rapidly spreading and highly pathogenic COVID-19 first a global public health emergency and then a pandemic. As SARS-CoV-2 infection continues to endanger lives, effective therapeutics are urgently needed. Repurposing existing drugs could be an efficient and timely means of identifying drugs that have activity against coronavirus. There are a few repurposed drugs such as lopinavir/ritonavir, baricitinib, remdesivir and chloroquine currently under clinical investigation 5, 6 . These drugs are expected to target key steps of viral entry, or specific proteins involved in viral replication, including viral proteases 7 . In addition to viral replication, the viral pathogen associated molecular pattern (PAMP) (e.g., immune dysfunction and endoplasmic reticulum stress, Figure 1A ) could be targeted to improve the clinical outcome 8 . PAMPs-mediated signaling pathways are attractive drug targets to alleviate diseases caused by human pathogens. Therefore, effectively targeting these pathways to stop the progression to ARDS caused by SARS-CoV-2 might save lives. Independent of SARS-CoV-2 infection, in aging adult populations, ARDS is associated with mortality rates of 30-50% 9 . Thus, a methodical and unbiased search for new drug candidates from a large drug library could uncover agents that have potential to arrest the infection and ameliorate its effect. To accomplish this, we sought to target infection-induced genes in the host cells, hoping to mitigate disease progression and alleviate symptoms.
We and others [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] have utilized a systems-based approach that employs gene expression profiles of disease samples and drug-induced gene expression profiles from cell lines to discover new therapeutic candidates for diseases. The essential idea is to identify drugs that reverse the disease gene expression signature by suppressing the over-expressed disease genes and activating the repressed genes ( Figure 1A) . A disease signature is defined as a list of differentially expressed genes between disease samples and normal control samples. We recently found that the reversal of gene expression (namely sRGES) correlates to drug efficacy in cancers 17 , demonstrating the feasibility of applying this approach to predict drug candidates for other diseases, including viral infection.
To utilize this approach for drug discovery against SARS-CoV-2, we first need to collect virus-related host gene expression profiles, which were not available at the time of writing. Given the high genomic similarity between SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2, we reasoned that existing host gene expression profiles of the samples infected by SARS-or MERS-CoV could approximate to those infected by SARS-CoV-2. To verify this assumption, we compiled 331 virus-induced signatures from enrichR and GEO (Table   S1 ) and used an established pipeline to score 1740 drugs in our repurposing library regarding their reversal of signature gene expression. Clustering of these signatures based on their drug prediction scores suggests that signatures derived from the same virus or the virus family under the similar experimental model tend to cluster together ( Figure S1 ). An example cluster includes one signature derived from primary human microvascular endothelial cells (MMVE001) after 48h of MERS-CoV infection (study id: GSE79218) and another derived from melanoma cells in mice after seven days of SARS-CoV infection (study id: GSE68820). In addition, Spearman correlation coefficient of the in vitro drug efficacy data (EC50: Half maximal effective concentration) of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV is up to 0.6 ( Figure 1B) . The clustering and correlation results suggested that drugs predicted based on the signatures related to SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV could also be applied for SARS-CoV-2. Therefore, we developed a pipeline to repurpose existing drugs against MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, and then experimentally evaluate these drugs in SARS-CoV-2 ( Figure 1C ). database. A good candidate should activate the repressed biological processes and inhibit the upregulated processes. B, Correlation of the published antiviral activities of 30 drugs (pEC50, -log10 transformed EC50 value in mol/L) against MERS-and SARS-CoV. C, Study workflow including creation of disease signatures, prediction of drug candidates, selection of a final drug list, and in vitro validation. One disease signature composed by the differentially expressed genes of each comparison led to one drug prediction list. Only the signature resulting in a prediction list where known positive drugs were enriched on the top was considered as a valid signature. D, Dysregulated pathways after SARS infection at 7h compared with 2h in lungs. E, The enrichment of top six dysregulated pathways in primary human microvascular endothelial (MMVE001) cells through 0h to 48h in MERS-CoV infection (left) and in mock (right). Only one study was selected for D and E, respectively, and the dysregulated pathways and their dynamics for other studies are available in supplementary materials ( Figure S2 and S3, Extended Data 1).
In total, 430 samples infected by either MERS-or SARS-CoV under different models (e.g., cell line, mouse models) across multiple time points from public repositories were used for the identification of disease signatures (Table S1, 12 studies in total). Their expression profiles were created using either microarray or RNA-Sequencing. Depending on the profiling platform, data processing and signature creation methods For each comparison, we computed a disease signature to characterize the infection status, followed by the prediction of which drugs may have activity. As we could not directly evaluate the quality and pathologic relevance of each disease signature, we turned to validating their action using those drugs that are positive in vitro MERS/SARS testing (41 positive drugs in total, 30 with EC50 values, Table S2 ). Among 215 MERS-CoV or SARS-CoV infection signatures, 13 signatures led to the drug list, where positive drugs are highly enriched on the top (Extended Data 2). Moreover, EC50 of these drugs significantly correlated with sRGES ( Figure 2A and Figure S4 ). In contrast, for the H1N1 infection signatures, we didn't observe any significant enrichment of anti-coronavirus positive drugs (Extended Data 2). The recent clinical data suggested that the combination of two drugs lopinavir/ritonavir present clinical benefits to patients with coronavirus 18, 19 . Both drugs were profiled in LINCS 20 individually; however, none of them could induce substantial gene expression change (absolute z score < 2) under 10 µM concentration in cancer cell lines; therefore, neither was predicted as a hit. We next found another dataset where HepaRG cells were treated by ritonavir under 10 different concentrations (from 9 nM to 300 µM). We observed that ritonavir could reverse nearly all the 13 disease signatures under high concentration (i.e., 10 µM to 200 µM) ( Figure S5 ).
Together, we reasoned that those highly ranked drugs with greater negative sRGES in these valid comparisons could be new therapeutic candidates.
To obtain the final drug prediction, as it's not trivial to merge disease signatures derived from different platforms and biological conditions, instead of merging them, we calculated the consensus score of all the drug prediction lists derived from individual valid disease signatures,. We took the median of the ranks across multiple comparisons for each drug, and ranked them based on their median rank (Extended Data 3).
Mechanism of action (MoA) enrichment analysis of the final ranked drug list revealed a few significant drug classes including CDK inhibitors, mTOR inhibitors and NF-κB pathway inhibitors ( Figure 2B ). Lately, Jeon et al. 21 tested the antiviral efficacy of 35 FDA-approved drugs against SARS-CoV-2, among which 14 positive drugs overlapped with our screening library. These drugs were also significantly enriched at the top of our prediction ( Figure 2C , p = 1.39E-4), further validating our predictions. Interestingly, three antiparasite drugs pyrvinium, ivermectin, niclosamide were ranked among the top 30. Both ivermectin, and niclosamide could inhibit the replication of SARS-CoV-2 in vitro 21, 22 and pyrvinium and niclosamide were effective in MERS and SARS 23, 24 .
We manually inspected the top candidates and selected ten representative candidates according to their reversal scores ( Figure 2D ), clinical applicability, MoA, administration routes and safety (Table S3 ). Finally, we evaluated their cytotoxicity and ability of the prevention of cytopathic effect (CPE) in the Vero E6 cell line ( Table 1) . Instead of measuring EC50, we used more stringent criteria, which required a 4-day complete prevention of CPE observed under the microcopy. Six of the proposed drugs showed less than 10 µM minimum concentration that could completely prevent CPE. However, five of them presented unfavorable cytotoxicity at their effective concentration. In the following confirmatory experiment, we examined the efficacy and toxicity for the four most effective drugs (CPE preventing concentration <= 1 µM), bortezomib, methotrexate, nvp-bez235 and alvocidib as well as chloroquine, a drug being used as the first-line treatment for SARS-CoV-2. None of the predicted drugs could completely prevent CPE, though chloroquine could at the dose of 15 µM. Figure 1E ), the signature from the comparison between 24 h and 0h could not capture the biology of viral infection, thus failed to recover known drugs. Those findings also reiterate the challenge of choosing appropriate experimental models and the right time points for drug treatment in COVID-19 25 .
We then developed a consensus score for each drug based on their potency to reverse these thirteen signatures. The prediction was externally validated by a recent drug screening against SARS-CoV-2 21 
We obtained a total of 430 samples for "SARS" or "MERS" related data from ArrayExpress, Gene 
The computation of RGES and the summarization RGES were detailed elsewhere and recently implemented as a standalone R package 31 
We 
We The negative correlation means a reversal relation. Ritonavir was originally developed as an inhibitor of HIV protease and now often used at a low dose with other protease inhibitors to boost the antiviral effect.
Our analysis suggests that ritonavir could only reverse the disease signature at a very high dose. 
The processed compound transcriptome profile was categorized into up-and down-regulated genes, with a threshold of log2 fold change greater than 1 or less than -1, respectively. Then each group of genes was submitted to Enrichr 33 (https://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr/) to compute the Gene Ontology enrichment.
GO terms with p-value less than 0.05 and adjusted p-value less than 0.2 were taken as significant.
Vero E6 cells [CRL:1586, ATCC] were grown in Eagle's minimal essential medium (EMEM)
supplemented with penicillin (100 units/ml), streptomycin (100 µg/ml), and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). SARS-CoV-2 (US_WA-1 isolate), the 3 rd passage in Vero E6 cells from the original CDC (Atlanta) material and sequence confirmed, was used throughout the study. The titer of the viral stock was 7.5 × 10 7 50% tissue culture infectious doses (TCID50)/ml. All experiments involving using infectious virus were conducted at the University of Texas Medical Branch in an approved biosafety level 3 laboratory.
A slightly modified Vero E6-based standard micro-neutralization assay was used to rapidly evaluate the 
All the analysis was conducted in R (v3.5.1) or Python (v3.7) programming language. The ggplot2, pheatmap and seaborn packages were used for data visualization. Student's t-test was performed for normally distributed data and Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used for other types of data to compute the pvalue.
Authors declare that all data used in this study are available within the article and its supplementary information files. Any other specific files can be provided from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. The code is available at GitHub (https://github.com/Bin-Chen-Lab/wars). 
