We examine available data on the number of individuals infected by the Covid-19 virus, across several different states in India, over the period January 30, 2020 to April 10, 2020. It is found that the growth of the number of infected individuals N (t) can be modeled across different states with a simple linear function N (t) = γ +αt beyond the date when reasonable number of individuals were tested (and when a countrywide lockdown was imposed). The slope α is different for different states. Following recent work by Notari (arxiv:2003.12417), we then consider the dependency of the α for different states on the average maximum and minimum temperatures, the average relative humidity and the population density in each state. It turns out that like other countries, the parameter α, which determines the rate of rise of the number of infected individuals, seems to have a weak correlation with the average maximum temperature of the state. In contrast, any significant variation of α with humidity or minimum temperature seems absent with almost no meaningful correlation. Expectedly, α increases (slightly) with increase in the population density of the states; however, the degree of correlation here too is negligible. These results seem to barely suggest that a natural cause like a hot summer (larger maximum temperatures) may contribute towards reducing the transmission of the virus, though the role of minimum temperature, humidity and population density remains somewhat obscure from the inferences which may be drawn from presently available data.
The ongoing Coronavirus pandemic which has gripped the entire world has been a cause of major existential concern among humans across countries and continents. COVID-19, as the pandemic is technically called, is a highly infectious viral disease which first appeared in Wuhan in China in December 2019. Since then, containing the virus through studies of its transmission mechanism has been a subject of great interest. A central question along these lines is whether local climate (as embodied in the temperature and relative humidity at a given location) on Earth has any role to play in the existence, functional behaviour and transmission of this virus. It is true that apart from temperature or humidity, there could be many other factors as well which could contribute to an answer to this serious question.
In 2011, a biology oriented analysis on the role of climatological factors was carried out in [2] for the SARS coronavirus (not the present one). In the last few months or so there has been renewed interest on this question largely in the context of SARS-Cov-2 and its devastating presence across the globe. Analysis done by various groups and individuals appear in [3] , [4] , [5] , [6] , [7] and [8] . Much of the analysis in these articles (except [3] ) is based on laboratory based biological/medical experimentation and analysis related to the virus.
Let us now try to state how we approach this problem. Our motivation and methods are entirely based on the recent work by Notari [1] . Firstly, we are not directly concerned with the medical or biological characteristics of the virus. Our only inputs seem to be the nature in which the number N of infected individuals in a given location changes with time. We have data on this freely available in the Internet. It has been found that the growth of this number N (t) in places like Italy or China has been exponential, i.e
where N 0 and α are two parameters. One expects that these parameters will however depend on various factors since they turn out to be different in different places. Assuming a sort of universality across countries and continents we may take the functional form to be the same, though that is also not a necessity.
Since N 0 and α depend on various factors, the question arises what could they be. We take exponential, any other growing functional form
can arise from the nature of the data. For example, Brandenburg proposes a quadratic dependence in a recent analysis [9] . In the above-stated expression (Eqn. 2) T min , T max , h and ρ denote the minimum temperature, maximum temperature, humidity and population density respectively. As we note later, a linear or quadratic dependency of α on the various parameters will be assumed in this work.
Available data on average temperature of a certain location over a certain period of time is easily obtainable from meteorological data. Using such data it is possible to plot α as a [11] , [12] , [13] , [14] ; (b) estimates of the number of infections in Indian hot-spots using fatality data [15] and (c) analysis on the space-time dependence of the outbreak [16] . The first report from Delhi came on March 02, 2020. From the available data we find the 3 All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20065821 doi: medRxiv preprint (1) As mentioned earlier, for Italy and China, N (t) varies exponentially with t. To check whether we find similar exponential rise in the number of infected individuals in India, we tried to fit the data points (N (t)) for each state using an exponential function of t. Figure   2 provides a magnified view of the best fitted curves along with the data points for some of the states, using an exponential function, as in Eqn. 1. The full plot for WB is shown in the inset. The increase in N (t) in neither of the six states, as shown in Figure 2 follows an exponential growth w.r.t. t till April 10, 2020. A similar observation is noted and can be made for other states too.
(2) For all states there is a hump before a sharp rise in N (t), which we show in the orange shaded regions in Figure 3 , for some of the states. We observe the same feature for other states too. In fact, for some of the states we observe two humps before the sharp rise, as in case of GJ. Interestingly, such a hump prior to a steady and sharp rise can be seen in N (t) vs. t plots for China or Italy. The existence of this hump seems to tally with the well-known model in epidemiology, known as the SIR model [18] . The exact solution of this model 4 All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20065821 doi: medRxiv preprint [19] , [20] is known to show a hump like behaviour when the number of infected individuals is plotted against time. The reason behind why such a hump precedes a sharp rise seems unknown.
(3) The data points (N (t)) for all states beyond the hump can be best fitted by a linear relation, N (t) = γ + αt, where α is the slope of the plots, determining the characteristics of the rise in the number of infected individuals in a state. Thus, from the above N (t) versus t plots one can extract the slopes related to the linear growth of the number of infected individuals in each state. We will now work with these slopes and try to correlate them with the temperature, humidity and population density in each state.
As an aside, following a tanh model proposed by Zullo [21] , we fit N (t) vs. t, for the state KL using the relation N (t) = A + B tanh(βt) + δ. The fitted curve is shown by a red solid line in Figure 4 . For most of the other states, it is too early for N(t) to reach the saturation level, and hence it is not meaningful to use this functional form to fit the data for these states. Interestingly, for KL, things do seem to match with this approximate model. 5 All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14. the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is Figure 5 . The value of R 2 =1 for perfect correlation. the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20065821 doi: medRxiv preprint are made for other countries too, in [1]. Nonetheless, weak correlation between the meteorological parameters (T max , T min and h) and the population density (ρ) do exist. In view of this, we fitted the data points in each panel in Figure 5 with a linear relation, α = A + B × x and with a polynomial relation α = A + B × x + C × x 2 , with x as T max , T min , h or ρ. The best fit curves are shown by blue and red solid lines in Figure 5(a)-(d) , respectively. The degree of correlation (R 2 ), as obtained from the fitting procedures in each panel is shown in Table 1 . We find a weak correlation between the value of α and the parameters x. The value of R 2 is relatively higher if one assumes polynomial relations between the slope (α) and T max , ρ than if we consider a linear relation. In the fitting procedure, the data point for Maharashtra (shown by green symbol in each plot) is not included, as it lies much away from other data points. the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20065821 doi: medRxiv preprint Our analysis above lead to the following simple conclusions.
• The growth of infected individuals in India, as of now, is nowhere near an exponential rise. The nature is at best a linear growth. This is expected to saturate and at the saturation point the turnaround may be fitted with a tanh function (as evident in the plot shown for the state of Kerala). Note that the slopes for each state is different. Is that a hint that climate or other factors may play a role? Without more data any definitive answer is virtually impossible.
• The plot of the slopes w.r.t. the maximum temperature in each state capital during the month of March-April show a weak correlation with T max . The slope seems to follow a polynomial relation with maximum temperature, with an initial rise, a maximum and then a later fall-off. It turns out that the slope is nearly independent of minimum temperature and humidity and the correlation is negligible. We also find a weak linear relation with the population density with a somewhat better correlation as compared to T min and h.
• It may be argued that during the month of March, variation of temperature and humidity across states is not much. However, even within this limited range of values a weak correlation between α and T max could be noted. Whether a weak correlation is just because of less available data or is an actual biological feature of the virus, remains to be seen, experimented upon and understood. At the very least, as apparent from and our very modest and limited analysis and the work by Notari [1], one cannot possibly deny or support a role of climatological factors in the transmission and sustenance of Covid-19.
Keeping in mind that our analysis is based on a large number of assumptions, we would like to end with some comments.
• It is apparent that population density plays a role in the ultimate effects which are expected when a lock-down is imposed in a state. Say, in two states 1 and 2, the number necessary to further investigate whether the ongoing lock-down (which is within the period over which we have analysed the data here) is the cause behind this feature of the slope versus population density plot in Figure 5 (d)?
• It is highly non-trivial to propose a universal model to describe a pandemic. The habits and living styles of the vast majority of a community surely play a big role in spreading the disease. It becomes quite subjective and artificial if we try to quantify such behavorial features. For example, the data point for MH, which includes Mumbai, a cosmopolitan business city in India, is an outlier in the plots, as shown in Figure 5 . One is not sure why-is it because of more testing in Mumbai, non-implementation of rigorous lock-down, unknown environmental factors -one may never know the answers to such questions, in terms of numbers.
• In the next few days, if the growth of N (t) shows trends towards an exponential rise one could still believe in the α found here. α would then become the exponent in the exponential, but we all know that for small t the exponential behaves linearly. In the event of an exponential rise, the data used here would be for the small-t time-frame with α as the slope in this initial phase of a linear rise in N (t).
Finally, it will be the precise and robust experimental results from biological/medical research which can eventually shed more light on how to control such a pandemic. Epidemiological models, which certainly rely on such precise biological/medical inputs can only give good qualitative hints, but may not necessarily be the best way of predicting the future.
Endnote: As and when newer data becomes available, we hope to modify the results quoted in this work here.
[1] A. Notari, Temperature dependence of COVID-19 transmission, arxiv: 2003:12417. the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20065821 doi: medRxiv preprint
