Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the causative agent of the Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) which is currently negatively affecting the population and disrupting the global economy. SARS-CoV-2 belongs to the +RNA virus family that utilize single-stranded positive-sense RNA molecules as genomes. SARS-CoV-2, like other coronaviruses, has an unusually large genome for a +RNA virus that encodes four structural proteinsthe matrix (M), small envelope (E), spike (S) and nucleocapsid phosphoprotein (N) -and sixteen nonstructural proteins (nsp1-16) that together ensure replication of the virus in the host cell. The nucleocapsid phosphoprotein N is essential for linking the viral genome to the viral membrane. Its N-terminal RNA binding domain (N-NTD) captures the RNA genome while the Cterminal domain anchors the ribonucleoprotein complex to the viral membrane via its interaction with the M protein.
Here, we characterized the structure of the N-NTD and its interaction with RNA using NMR spectroscopy. We observed a positively charged canyon on the surface of the N-NTD lined with arginine residues suggesting a putative RNA binding site. Next, we performed an NMR titration experiment using an RNA duplex. The observed changes in positions of signals in the N-NTD NMR spectra allowed us to construct a model of the N-NTD in complex with RNA.
Positive-sense, single-stranded RNA viruses pose a global threat to human health as documented by the recent Zika virus outbreak and, more importantly, by the current COVID-19 pandemic caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) of the Coronaviridae family. SARS-CoV-2 earned its name due to the similarity of its genome to that of the SARS virus. Another deadly virus, the MERS (Middle East respiratory syndrome) virus is also a member of the Coronaviridae family, demonstrating how dangerous its members can be to humans. However, the recent COVID-19 pandemic is noteworthy. It is the most dangerous coronavirus to date, causing thousands of deaths, overwhelming the global health care system capacity, disrupting our everyday lives and causing enormous economic damage.
It also reminds us of the vulnerability of our civilization to pathogens and highlights the importance of antiviral research.
Coronaviruses have the largest known genomes (up to 32 kb) among +RNA viruses, and they encode four structural and sixteen non-structural proteins. The non-structural proteins carry all of the enzymatic activities important for the viral replication, mostly associated with RNA replication. The genome SARS-CoV-2 also encodes an RNA-dependent RNA-polymerase complex (nsp7, nsp8 and nsp12), RNA capping machinery (nsp10, nsp13, nsp14 and 16) and additional enzymes such as proteases (the nsp3 PL pro and the nsp5 3CL pro ) which cleave viral polyproteins and/or impede innate immunity (1) . The four structural proteins together with the viral +RNA genome and the envelope constitute the virion. The matrix (M), small envelope (E), and spike (S) proteins are embedded within the lipid envelope. The fourth structural protein, the nucleocapsid phosphoprotein (N), physically links the envelope to the +RNA genome. It consists of an N-terminal (NTD) and a C-terminal (CTD) domain ( Figure 1 ). Both domains are capable of RNA binding. In addition, the CTD serves as a dimerization domain and binds the matrix protein forming the physical link between the+ RNA genome and the envelope. The SARS N protein has also been shown to modulate the host intracellular machinery and plays regulatory roles during the viral life cycle (2) . In light of the genomic similarities between SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2, it is reasonable to expect the N protein to function in a similar way.
CoV-2 encodes an exonuclease (a second enzymatic activity of the RNA capping factor nsp14) presumably capable of repairing mismatches in newly synthesized double-stranded RNA. Additional antiviral compounds might be necessary to simultaneously target several viral proteins and create a trap that the virus cannot escape by mutation. In any case, drugs targeting proteins other than the RNA polymerase are urgently needed. In this study, we have analyzed in detail the structure of the N protein NTD (N-NTD) and
its interaction with RNA using protein NMR. Based on this data we generated a model of the N-NTD and its complex with RNA that illustrates how the N protein recognizes RNA and provides a basis for rational drug design.
Here, we report the NMR structure of the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid phosphoprotein N-terminal RNA binding domain N-NTD. The structure revealed an overall right hand-like fold composed of a β-sheet core with an extended central loop. The core region adopts a five-stranded U-shaped right-handed antiparallel β-sheet platform with the topology β4-β2-β3-β1-β5 flanked by two short α-helices (α1 occurs before the β2 strand and α2 after the β4 strand). A prominent feature of the structure is a large protruding loop between β2-β3 that forms a long basic β-hairpin (β2' and β3') ( Figure 2 ). This long β-hairpin is reminiscent of a finger and composed mostly of basic amino acids residues, and we therefore refer to it as a basic finger ( Figure 2 ). This basic finger extends from the β-core structure that we refer to as a palm. Analysis of the electrostatic potential of the N-NTD revealed a highly positively charged cleft between the basic finger and the palm creating a putative RNA binding site in the hinge/junction region between the palm and basic finger. Our NMR analysis is consistent with recent X-ray analysis (PDB IDs: 6M3M and 6VYO). In addition, the NMR structure revealed that the basic finger is highly flexible (Figure 2A ) whereas in the crystal structures it is locked in one place by crystal lattice contacts.
The structure of the N-NTD suggests a putative RNA binding site. Intrigued, we aimed to obtain an experimental model of the N-NTD in a complex with RNA. We performed an NMR-based titration experiment using a short double-stranded RNA (5'-CACUGAC-3' and 5'-GUCAGUG-3'). Basically, we were adding isotopically unlabeled RNA to the 15 N/ 13 C labeled protein and we followed changes in positions of assigned signals in NMR spectra ( Figure 3 ) to reveal the molecular interface of the N-NTD:RNA complex. Overlay of the 2D 15 N/ 1 H HSQC and 2D 13 C/ 1 H HSQC spectra of a free and RNA bound N-NTD revealed residues that were significantly perturbed by RNA binding. All these significantly affected residues (A50, T57, H59, R92, I94, S105, R107, R149, Y172) are located in the basic finger or close to the junction between the basic finger and the palm as expected based on the analysis of the electrostatic potential. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.022194 doi: bioRxiv preprint We next used the experimental data to build an atomic model of the protein:RNA complex. We used the HADDOCK protocol for NMR-restraint driven docking simulations (4) . As a starting conformation of the RNA we chose a short double helix based on the published crystal structure of a short RNA duplex (5) . A detailed analysis of the chemical shift perturbations (CSP) mapped onto the solution structure of N-NTD provided a set of 'active' solvent-accessible residues on N-NTD that were expanded to surrounding 'passive' residues. The selection criteria for active residues were that their CSP values were more than one standard deviation from the average value (0.05 ppm) calculated for the entire set of CSPs and that their accessibility to solvent was more than 20% (6) . Restraints for the RNA molecule were kept ambiguous to avoid potential bias. A standard docking protocol yielded a set of water-refined conformations for the protein:RNA complex that were clustered into several distinct classes. As expected, the RNA duplex molecule was bound in the positively charged cleft in all clusters. The most populated cluster also contained the fewest violations of experimental restraints and was therefore selected as a representative conformation for the N-NTD: RNA complex.
The structure revealed an RNA duplex bound to the positively charged canyon located between the basic finger and the palm of the N-NTD. A notable feature of the binding interface is its electrostatic potential. It is highly positive with several arginine residues (R92, R107, R149) that directly contact the RNA. Our model also predicts several hydrophobic interactions, such as one involving the side-chains of residues I94 and L104, which also contribute to RNA binding. Taken together our data provide a molecular snapshot of RNA recognition by the coronaviral N protein and suggest a hot spot located at the interface of the basic finger and the palm as a suitable target for targeting by small molecules.
Effective drugs are urgently needed to combat the COVID-19 disease. Most patients are not given any drug and the treatment relies on curing the symptoms. The most promising drug is remdesivir, a nucleotide analog that targets the viral RNA-dependent RNA-polymerase (RdRp). Viral polymerases are certainly good targets for antiviral compounds as these enzymes are absolutely vital for any +RNA virus. However, every viral protein is a potential target for antiviral compounds and an effective treatment may require several active compounds, each targeting a different protein at the same time. This approach, known as HAART (highly active antiretroviral therapy), has proven effective in the case of HIV, which is another virus with an RNA genome. In this study, we structurally characterized the N protein, a structural protein that is essential for assembly of the virion. We obtained an atomic model of the N protein N-terminal domain in an unliganded form and in complex with an RNA duplex. The structure revealed a right hand fold featuring a prominent basic finger protruding from the palm. Analysis of its electrostatic potential . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.022194 doi: bioRxiv preprint ( Figure 2C ) revealed highly positively charged canyon that is situated in the interface between the basic finger and the palm subdomain and constitutes a putative RNA binding site. We performed an NMR titration experiment to obtain experimental proof of the RNA binding site. An overlay of the 15 N/ 13 C labeled protein NMR spectrum in the absence of ligand and in complex with RNA revealed amino acid residues with large chemical shifts upon the addition of RNA (Figure 3 ). Not surprisingly, all these residues are located in or in close proximity to the basic canyon, confirming the canyon as the RNA binding site. To illustrate how the coronaviral N-NTD recognizes RNA we built an atomic model of the N-NTD:RNA complex using the NMR titration data as a restraint for computer simulations in HADDOCK. The model reveals a hotspot on the surface of the N-NTD between the finger and palm subdomains that is essential for RNA binding and suggests this site as an ideal place for targeting by small molecules.
Protein expression, and purification -N-terminal domain of the SARS CoV-2 N protein (N-NTD, residues 44-180) was expressed as a fusion protein with 6xHis tag followed by cleavage site for TEV protease on its N-terminus. Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) expressing the protein were grown in minimal media containing 15 NH4Cl and [U-13 C]glucose. The culture was lysed by sonication in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, 10% glycerol, 3mM β-mercaptoethanol) and the lysate was cleared by centrifugation. His-tagged protein was purified from the supernatant by affinity chromatography on a Nickel-NTA column (Machery-Nagel) according to manufactur's instruction, the 6x His tag was cut off by the TEV protease and the protein was further purified by size-exclusion chromatography on a Superdex 75 HiLoad 26/60 column (GE Healthcare) in SEC buffer (20 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl, 0.01% NaN3, pH 5.5). Purity of the protein was checked using SDS-PAGE. Protein was concentrated to 1.19 mM and used for NMR experiments. For further NMR measurements of binding RNA, the N-NTD was diluted to 300 μM and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in -80°C until needed.
To examine the RNA binding mode of the N-NTD we used a commercially available 7mer RNA duplex that was prepared by annealing of RNA oligonucleotides 5'-CACUGAC-3' and 5'-GUCAGUG-3' (Sigma).
The RNA oligonucleotides were mixed in a molar ratio 1:1 at the final concetration 200 μM of each oligonucleotide and water supplemented with 50 mM NaCl. The mixture was incubated at 60°C for 15 min and then cooled slowly at 26°C. For RNA titration, annealed RNA was added to 50 μM protein in molar ratios 1:0.3125, 1:0.625, 1:1 and 1:2.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.022194 doi: bioRxiv preprint equipped with a triple-resonance ( 15 N/ 13 C/ 1 H) cryoprobe. The sample volume was either 0.16 or 0.35 mL, in SEC buffer, 5% D2O/90-95% H2O. A series of double-and triple-resonance spectra (7, 8) were recorded to obtain sequence-specific resonance assignment. We used I-PINE assignment tool (9) implemented in NMRFAM-SPARKY (10) for initial automatic assignment. 1 H-1 H distance restraints were derived from 3D 15 N/ 1 H NOESY-HSQC and 13 C/ 1 H NOESY-HMQC, which were acquired using a NOE mixing time of 100 ms.
The structural calculation was carried out in Cyana (11) using NOESY data in combination with backbone torsion angle restraints, generated from assigned chemical shifts using the program TALOS+ (12) . First, the combined automated NOE assignment and structure determination protocol (CANDID) was used for automatic NOE cross-peak assignment. Subsequently, five cycles of simulated annealing combined with redundant dihedral angle restraints were used to calculate a set of converged structures with no significant restraint violations (distance and van der Waals violations <0.5Å and dihedral angle constraint violations <5°). The 40 structures with the least restraint violations were further refined in explicit solvent using the YASARA software with the YASARA forcefield(13) and subjected to further analysis using the Protein Structure Validation Software suite (www.nesg.org). The statistics for the resulting structure is summarized in Table 1 . The structures, NMR restraints and resonance assignments were deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB, accession code: 6YI3) and BMRB (accession code: 34511).
To follow changes in the chemical shifts of a protein upon RNA binding, we calculated chemical shift perturbations (CSPs). The CSP of each assigned resonance in the 2D 15 N/ 1 H HSQC spectra of the protein in the free state is calculated as the geometrical distance in ppm to the peak in the 2D 15 N/ 1 H HSQC spectra acquired under different conditions using the formula: Δ = √ Δ 2 + (Δ • ) 2 , where  is a weighing factor of 0.2 used to account for differences in the proton and nitrogen spectral widths. (14) Molecular docking -The structure for the N-NTD in complex with the 7mer RNA duplex was calculated using HADDOCK (4) . The RNA homology model was prepared by mutating the native 7mer RNA duplex (PDB 4U37) (5) in Pymol (The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Version 2.0 Schrödinger, LLC.) that was subsequently subjected to an energy minimization in YASARA (13) . For the actual docking, we used a representative structure from the set of obtained structures and followed a standard protocol. As active were selected those N-NTD residues with CSP > 0.05 ppm and at least 20% solvent accessibility (A50, T57, H59, R92, I94, S105, R107, R149, A152 and Y172), while as passive were additionally selected adjacent solvent exposed residues (T49, T54, L55, R88, A90, K102, L104, Y109, Y111, P151, A155, A156, E174 and G175). On RNA side, all 14 nucleobases were defined as active for the experimentally driven . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.022194 doi: bioRxiv preprint docking protocol. In addition, in total three regions within the N-NTD were defined as fully flexible segments for the advanced stages of the docking calculation (the N-terminal G1-T9, the central loop I54-M61 and the C-terminal S136-S140). The final set of 200 water-refined structures was clustered using a Fraction of Common Contacts approach (15) with a default cut-off 0.75 and a minimal cluster size = 4. The resulting structures were sorted into 7 clusters and the most populated cluster (n = 30) that also exhibited the lowest interaction energy was selected for detailed analysis. 
The NMR restraints, resonance assignments and the structure were deposited in the PDB under accession code 6YI3 and in the BMRB database under accession code 34511). The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.022194 doi: bioRxiv preprint The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.022194 doi: bioRxiv preprint The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.022194 doi: bioRxiv preprint The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.022194 doi: bioRxiv preprint
