The current SARS covid-19 epidemic spread appears to be influenced by ethnical, geographical and sex-related factors that may involve genetic susceptibility to diseases. Similar to SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2 exploits angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) as a receptor to invade cells, notably type II alveolar epithelial cells. Importantly, ACE2 gene is highly polymorphic. Here we have used in silico tools to analyze the possible impact of ACE2 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the interaction with SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein. We found that S19P (common in African people) and K26R (common in European people) were, among the most diffused SNPs worldwide, the only two SNPs that were able to potentially affect the interaction of ACE2 with SARS-CoV-2 spike. FireDock simulations demonstrated that while S19P may decrease, K26R might increase the ACE2 affinity for SARS-CoV-2 Spike. This finding suggests that the S19P may genetically protect, and K26R may predispose to more severe SARS-CoV-2 disease.
In principle, any new infectious agent that challenges a totally susceptible population with little or no immunity against it is able to totally infect the population causing pandemics. Pandemics rapidly spread affecting a large part of people causing plenty of deaths with significant social disruption and economic loss. However, if we look at the even worst pandemics in the human history we can realize that ethnic and geographical differences in the susceptibility to disease actually exist, in spite of the infectious sources and transmission routes that are the same for all individuals 1 . The current SARS covid-19 (a shortened form of "coronavirus disease of 2019") epidemic spread appears to be similarly influenced by ethnical and geographical factors. After its initial spread in China, the pandemic is now progressing at an accelerating rate in Western Europe and the United States of America 2 . In these regions, the causative agent, the severe acute respiratory syndrome corona virus -2 (SARS-CoV-2) is spreading incredibly quickly between people, due to its newness -no one on earth has immunity to SARS Covid-19 -and transmission route. Yet, in the other regions of the world, the kinetics of diffusion and mortality seem less impressive, although the world has become highly interconnected as a result of a huge growth in trades and travels 2 .
A multitude of factors may concur to explain the ethnic and geographical differences in pandemic progression and severity, including cultural, social and economic inequality, as well as health care system organization, and climate also. Mostly, considerable individual differences in genetic susceptibility to diseases may be involved 3 . Genomic predisposition is a major concept in modern medicine, and understanding of molecular bases of genetic predisposition can help to find prevention and treatment strategies for the corresponding diseases 3 . In the SARS Covid-19, even subtle inter-individual genetic differences may affect both the SARS-CoV-2 viral life cycle and the host innate and acquired immune response.
SARS-CoV-2 is an enveloped positive-stranded RNA virus that replicates in the cytoplasm, and uses envelope spike projections as a key to enter human airway cells 4 . In coronaviruses spike glycoproteins, which forms homotrimers protruding from the viral surface, are a primary determinant of cell tropism, pathogenesis, and host interspecies transmission. Spike glycoproteins comprise two major functional domains: an N-terminal domain (S1) for binding to the host cell receptor, and a C-terminal domain (S2) that is responsible for fusion of the viral and cellular membranes 5 .
Following the interaction with the host receptor, internalization of viral particles into the host cells is accomplished by complex mechanisms that culminate with the activation of fusogenic activity of spike, as a consequence of major conformational changes that, in general, may be triggered by receptor binding, low pH exposure and proteolytic activation 5 .
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 23.057042 doi: bioRxiv preprint In some coronaviruses spike glycoproteins are cleaved by furin, a Golgi-resident protease, at the boundary between S1 and S2 domains, and the resulting S1 and S2 subunits remain non-covalently bound in the prefusion conformation with important consequences on fusogenicity 5 . Notably, at variance with SARS-CoV and other SARS-like CoV Spike glycoproteins, SARS-CoV-2 Spike glycoprotein contain a furin cleavage site at the S1/S2 boundary, which is cleaved during viral biogenesis 6 , and may affect the major entry route of viruses into the host cell 5 .
Productive entry of coronaviruses that harbor non-cleaved Spike glycoproteins (such as SARS-CoV) rely on endosomal proteases suggesting that this entry is accomplished by hijacking the host endocytic machinery 5 . Indeed, it has been reported that SARS-CoV infection is inhibited by lysomotropic agents because of the inhibition of the low-pH-activated protease cathepsin L 7 .
However, SARS-CoV is also able to fuse directly to the cell membrane in the presence of relevant exogenous proteases, and this entry route is believed to be much more efficient compared to the endocytic route 8 . In fact, proteases from the respiratory tract such as those belonging to the transmembrane protease/serine subfamily (TMPRSS), TMPRSS2 or HAT (TMPRSS11d) are able to induce SARS-CoV spike glycoprotein fusogenic activity 9,10,11,12 . The first cleavage at the S1-S2 boundary (R667) facilitates the second cleavage at position R797 releasing the fusogenic S2' subdomain 5 . On the other hand, there is also evidence that cleavage of the ACE2 C-terminal segment by TMPRSS2 can enhance spike glycoprotein-driven viral entry 13 . Notably, it has been very recently demonstrated that also SARS-CoV-2 cell entry depends on TMPRSS2, and is blocked by protease inhibitors 14 .
SARS-CoV-2 and respiratory syndrome corona virus (SARS-CoV) Spike proteins share very high phylogenetic similarities (99%), and, indeed, both viruses exploit the same human cell receptor namely angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), a transmembrane enzyme whose expression dominates on lung alveolar epithelial cells 6, 15, 16 . This receptor is an 805-amino acid long captoprilinsensitive carboxypeptidase with a 17-amino acids N-terminal signal peptide and a C-terminal membrane anchor. It catalyzes the cleavage of angiotensin I into angiotensin 1-9, and of angiotensin II into the vasodilator angiotensin 1-7, thus playing a key role in systemic blood pressure homeostasis, counterbalancing the vasoconstrictive action of angiotensin II, which is generated by cleavage of angiotensin I catalyzed by ACE 17 Although ACE2 mRNA is expressed ubiquitously, ACE2 protein expression dominates on lung alveolar epithelial cells, enterocytes, arterial and venous endothelial cells, and arterial smooth muscle cells 18 .
There is evidence that ACE2 may serve as a chaperone for membrane trafficking of an amino acid transporter B0AT1 (also known as SLC6A19), which mediates the uptake of neutral amino . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a In all models, similar to SARS-CoV RBM, SARS-CoV-2 RBM forms a concave surface that houses a convexity formed by two helices on the exposed surface of ACE2. Strong network of Hbond and salt bridge interactions mediate the receptor-ligand binding. Global energy and several distinctive features of the 3D models with and without glycosylation are reported in Supplementary   Table 1 . Contact residues are classified as: "permanent" (predicted as binding residues in all 10 models), "stable" (predicted as binding residues in 6 or 7 out 10 models), "unstable" (predicted as binding residues in 6 or 7 out 10 models), "hyper-unstable" (1 or 2 models out of 10). Twenty-seven substitutions were predicted to influence the ACE2/Spike interface in at least one of the different 3D PDB models. Fifteen and seventeen were predicted to affect the ACE2/B0AT1 and ACE2/ACE2 interfaces, respectively. Some residues, which are described in UNIPROT database (https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/Q9BYF1) as important for the interaction between spike and ACE2, are permanent contact residues (predicted as binding) but all of these are non-polymorphic . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.23.057042 doi: bioRxiv preprint (Fig. 1b) . In contrast, polymorphic residues are stable, unstable or hyper-unstable. A list of 18 SNPs from dbSNP (S19P , I21T, I21V, E23K, A25T, K26E, K26R, T27A, E35D, E35K, E37K, S43R, E75G, M82I, G326E, E329G, G352V; D355N), which were predicted to affect the ACE2/Spike interface, was used for further analysis.
SNPs possibly affecting ACE2 glysosylation. Supplementary Table 1 illustrates amino acid glycosylation sites, and structure of the glycosidic chains as inferred from different ACE2/Spike complex PDB models. Putative polymorphic sites (Q60R, N103H, N546D, N546S) from dbSNP database that may affect ACE2 glycosylation are also reported. One of these amino acid variations, N546D, is rather common in South Asia (Supplementary Table 4 ).
FireDock 34 was used to estimate the effects of removal of glycosidic residues or chains on ACE2 interaction with SARS-CoV-2 Spike RBD by calculating ΔG values. The data indicated that removal of glycosidic chains results in either an increased or a decreased ΔG values, depending on the PDB model (Fig. 1c ). In particular, removal of glycosidic moieties apparently strengthened the ACE2/Spike interaction in SARS-CoV Spike/ACE2 in the 2AJF model, while it appeared to weaken the interaction between SARS-CoV-2 Spike and ACE2 in the 6VW1 model. In both cases, the effect was mostly due to removal of the terminal beta-mannose (BMA) (Fig. 1c) , which was predicted to decorate a glycosidic chain attached to aspartic amino acid residue at position 90 that maps in a helix that is involved in the interaction with Spike, as shown in Fig. 1d . Noteworthy, in the 6VW1 model, BMA is involved in two H-bonds and one pseudo-bond (Fig. 1e) , and these bonds are lost in non-glycosylated models. In contrast, in the 2AJF model, the BMA forms only one H-bond, and after removal of terminal BMA, the Thr-41 acquires more grads for binding thereby strengthening the interaction with ACE2. These results seem to suggest that ACE2 glycosylation may play a different role in modulating the interaction with SARS-CoV Spike and SARS-CoV-2
Spike.
FireDock 34 was used to estimate the effects of selected ACE2 SNPs on interaction with SARS-CoV Spike RBD (2AJF model) and SARS-CoV-2 Spike RBD (6M0J and 6WV1 models). Selection was based on both frequency of these SNPs worldwide, and predicted effects on ACE2 binding interfaces. Screening was preceded by correlation analysis of SNPs data from different databases ( Supplementary Fig. 2 ). Network plot (Fig. 2a) and Non-Metric Multidimensional Scaling (NM-MDS, Bray-Curtis index) (Fig. 2b) of the most diffused SNPs demonstrated that S19P and K26R
were, among the most diffused SNPs worldwide, the only two SNPs that were able to potentially . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.23.057042 doi: bioRxiv preprint affect the interaction of ACE2 with SARS-CoV Spike and SARS-CoV-2 Spike (Supplementary Table 3 ). In particular, the S19P SNP is rather common in African people with a frequency about 0.3%, while K26R SNP is frequent in European people with a frequency about 0.5% (Supplementary Table 4 ).
FireDock 34 results indicated that the S19P substitution decreased the affinity of ACE2 with Spike in 2AJF and 6VW1 models (Fig. 2c) and similar results were obtained with all other models.
Moreover, this amino acid substitution seems also to affect the ACE2 N-terminal cleavage site (Fig.   2d ), and when FireDock 34 simulations were carried out on ACE2 with the alternative cleavage site, the effects of S19P SNP was much more impressive (Fig. 2 c) .
In contrast, the K26R and the less common K26E substitutions appeared to increase the affinity of ACE2 with SARS-CoV-2 Spike (2AJF model), and slightly decrease the affinity of ACE2 with SARS-CoV Spike (6VW1 and 6M17) models (Fig. 3a) . As 6VW1 was generated with a chimeric SARS-CoV/SARS-CoV-2 Spike, to support our results we performed an additional simulation by challenging the ACE2 structure from 6VW1 with the Spike structures that were generated by the different models (Fig. 3b) , and the results confirmed those shown in Fig. 3a . Noteworthy, the receptor-ligand interactions was much weaker in 6M17 (SARS-CoV-2 Spike RBD /ACE2/B0AT1 complex) with respect to the other models, confirming an inhibitory function of B0AT1. However, in this model, at lower energy values, the effects of K26R/E substitutions were much more evident. shows that ACE2 (computed by using 3D PDB model 6M17 as input file) is characterized by a high deformation tract that is located immediately upstream of the transmembrane domain ( Fig. 4b) ,
whereas the C-terminal tail is characterized by high fluctuation (Fig. 4c) . suggest that the hydrophobic domain alone is highly unstable in the membrane confirming that a chaperone is required for correct topology maintenance. This function was assigned to the moonlighting amino acid transporter B0AT1 19 .
To investigate dynamic properties of ACE2 globular head, the trans-membrane helix and conserved domains were firstly mapped on a 3D structure. Then, Dynamut 36 simulation was carried out on ACE2 by using 6WV1 PDB model (without the transmembrane domain) (Fig. 5ab) . Results indicate that some residues of the ACE2 interface, which are involved in the interaction with SARS-CoV-2 Spike glycoprotein can actually fluctuate (Fig. 5cd ).
Dynamic properties of SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV spike proteins were also investigated. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.23.057042 doi: bioRxiv preprint distance between the amino acid residues 26-36 and 72-82 shows high variation indicating that Met-82 and Lys-26 may be characterized by considerable degree of freedom.
Dynamut36 and ENCoM 42 were used to compare dynamic features of ACE2 and ACE2 polymorphic variants. Both these tools predict ΔΔG values associated with single amino acid substitution; ENCoM 42 also predicts ΔΔE values. The Dynamut 36 and ENCoM 42 outputs were used to generate ordination plots (PCA) by PAST to evaluate overall results (Fig. 6a, Supplementary Fig.   5 and Supplementary Table 7 ).
All 197 amino acid residues that were reported as polymorphic in dbSNP were analyzed. In Ultimately, infectivity and lethality do not seem linearly related, and probably represent problems to be solved with different, albeit complementary, approaches.
Basic aspects of epidemiology of the disease warrant some considerations: differently from other countries, in South Korea (which adopted a policy of extensive PCR screening), women represent 63% of infected people 44 as opposed to 50% in Italy 43 (where the policy has been to test only severely symptomatic cases for a long time). Lethality figures in women were 0.4% and 8.7% in South Korea and Italy, respectively, as opposed to 1% and 16.4% in men. It could be speculated that women are probably more prone to infection but often present a less severe disease. Although higher incidence of cardiac, respiratory and metabolic co-morbidities are probably responsible for more severe form of infection in men, estrogen-induced upregulation of ACE2 expression would explain increased susceptibility of women to a less severe and often asymptomatic form of disease.
Furthermore, the ACE2 gene is located on Xp22, in an area where genes are reported to escape from X-inactivation, further explaining higher expression in females 45, 46 .
On the other hand, it has been hypothesized that, regardless of sex, pharmacological (antihypertensive drugs, such as ACE inhibitors and sartans) or environmental factors (NO2 pollution), capable of inducing an overexpression of ACE2 could be responsible of increased susceptibility to infection and/or greater severity 47 . ACE2 plays an essential role in the renin-angiotensinaldosterone system, and its loss of function due to the massive binding of viral particles and internalization could constitute an essential element of the pathophysiology of pulmonary and cardiac damage during COVID-19 infection 47, 48 . In this context it should be underlined that ACE2
probably plays a dual role in the dynamic of infection and disease course. While at beginning ACE2 overexpression may increase the entry of the virus into the cell and its replication, its consequent viral-induced loss of function results in an unopposed accumulation of angiotensin II that further . This allowed the authors to predict that hamsters could be infected, which was experimentally confirmed -underlining the reliability of in silico modeling-and could be subsequently at the origin of inter-animal transmission. However, hamsters, although developing clinical signs of the infection and relative histopathological changes, did not die 50 : we speculate that lethality may be related to Spike/ACE2 affinity. On the other hand, the lower affinity in bat could explain -besides a better immune control-why these animals are carriers without dying.
In the same study, Chan and colleagues 50 13 pneumonia and widespread extrapulmonary organ damage) without dying; furthermore their viral clearance was markedly slower as compared to wild type mice which had only mild abnormalities 53 .
So, if modestly SNP-determined lower affinity between spike and ACE2 does not seem to explain the differences in the distribution and lethality of the disease in humans, we hypothesize that the question can be addressed in a specular way: perhaps polymorphisms responsible for higher affinity can be responsible of higher severity of disease, especially when very high affinity receptors are overexpressed because of the above mentioned environmental and pharmacological factors. Obviously underlying diseases would contribute to an even more severe course of the disease, with an intense viral replication capable of infecting in turn a large number of persons, including some individuals with similar ACE2 polymorphisms, and so on. Our in silico models allowed us to identify K26R and K26E as SNPs with a possible increase in Spike/ACE2 affinity.
K26R SNP is relatively frequent in European people with a frequency about 0.5%, which would correspond to a potential target population of 2,230,000 people at the European Union level.
In addition to FireDock 34, 35 simulations that led to predict the possible effects of S19P, K26R
and K26E ACE2 SNPs, Dynamut 36 and ENCoM 42 tools were used to compare dynamic features of ACE2 and its polymorphic variants in order to analyze the possible indirect effects on binding interfaces of SNPs that are located outside these interfaces. SNPs I468V, V488A and A501T were identified as the most common SNPs that may produce these indirect effects in dynamic models.
Although the precise effects of these SNPs on the interaction between ACE2 and SARS-CoV-2 or SARS-CoV Spike proteins have to be determined in more detail, nevertheless, it is desirable to use dynamic modeling to unmask indirect effects of SNPs.
It seems necessary to confirm in vivo that, among patients with serious disease and/or fatal outcome, polymorphisms responsible for a very high Spike/ACE2 affinity are more frequent than among patients with less severe/asymptomatic disease or even than in general population.
Obviously, the impact of these polymorphisms on severity of outcome should be weighted by appropriate demographic and clinical factors. If these differences were confirmed, this would pave the way for the identification, on a population scale, of healthy individuals whose molecular phenotypes would be responsible for more serious disease. Apart from the usual social distancing measures, which could be reinforced for these cases, targeted drug prevention strategies could be evaluated. It could be logical to assess pharmacological prophylactic interventions, as proposed in categories of healthy people at particular risk of exposure such as care-givers. In particular, chloroquine, interfering with N-terminal glycosylation of ACE2, could lower its affinity for spike, thus representing an interesting candidate. In our in silico model, we found that removal of . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.23.057042 doi: bioRxiv preprint glycosidic moieties weakened the interaction between SARS-CoV-2 spike and ACE2. The serine protease inhibitor camostat mesylate, approved in Japan to treat unrelated diseases, has been shown to block TMPRSS2 activity 54, 55 and is thus another interesting candidate.
On the other hand, the identification of broader categories of people with lower risk of developing severe disease, could allow a safer exit from the lock-down phase, while facilitating the establishment of a faster herd immunity, and waiting reliable serological tests and, above all, effective vaccines.
On the basis of our in silico study we speculate that infection and mortality are . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.23.057042 doi: bioRxiv preprint implement the model of a DPPC (phosphatide) bilayer that embedded ACE2, while NAMD 40 was used to perform the analysis via VMD (NAMD GUI) 39, 40 . Chimera was used to select the frames, and to measure the oscillations of interface residues.
Effect of mutations on ACE2 dynamic features. Dynamut 36 was used to estimate the effect of SNPs on structural dynamics features. This tool generated two results with the two algorithms ENCoM 41 and Dynamut. A quartile-based clustering was performed with 197 SNPs obtaining two equivalent plots where results were clustered in two ways: ENCoM groups and Dynamut groups.
After this step, we extrapolated data related to the three interfaces (ACE2/Spike protein, ACE2/B0AT1 and ACE2/ACE2), because the analyzed SNPs can directly interfere on either binding to Spike proteins, or ACE2 homo-dimerization or ACE2/B0AT1 binding. In order to select the best results from this last subset, the clusters for Dynamut and for ENCoM were combined.
PCA plots were generated using PAST software 61 .
Docking: dynamic models of ACE2 / Spike protein interactions. To obtain the protein complex models with and without glycosylations we used two software: PathDock 62 and Gramm-X 63 , respectively. Resulting complexes were submitted to FireDock 34.35 to evaluate the energy score. As receptors and ligands we used all chains of ACE2 in PDB models (2AJF, 6VW1, 6LZG, 6M0J, 6M17), and the models of isoform X1 and X3, which were generated by using SwissModel 64 The final results were analyzed using Chimera.
To gain information about the geographical distribution and abundance of ACE2 SNPs, we analyzed dbSNP 57,58 and available databases:
GnomAD-Exomes, TopMed, ExAC, GnomAD-Genomes, GO Exome Sequencing Project, 1000Genomes. The frequency values of the most abundant SNPs (1KGB database) were reported in . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.23.057042 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplementary Table S4 . Data were analyzed by PAST 61 that generated NM-MDS ordination plots.
Additionally, network and between-database correlation analyses (PAST 61 ) were carried out in order to clarify the relationship between SNPs, and the correlation between data of all databases.
To model the binding of S19P ACE2 we implemented two types of analyses: static analysis and dynamic analysis. The models with substitutions of one single amino acid were selected form SIPPe results (static model), and were submitted to FireDock 34, 35 server. In this step we focused on mutant and wild type models of 6VW1 and 2AJF. Serine in position 19 is the first residue of the mature chain of ACE2, while residues from 1 to 18 form a signal peptide. To prove if this SNP changes the cut site of the ACE2 precursor we used Signal IP 5.0 66 . The sequence of this predicted mutant was submitted to I-Tasser server 65 in order to obtain the mutant models. Using this predicted model as a receptor and SIPPe complexes as a reference we superposed the structures obtaining two static models (one for ligand: 2AJF and 6VW1). The dynamic models were implemented using
Gramm-X (ligands Spike chains of 6VW1 and 2AJF; receptor mutant models). All models obtained were submitted to FireDock 34, 35 in order to obtain a value of global energy.
To model the binding K26R or K26E ACE2 we used a set of static models. Firstly, starting from the dataset of the mutant models selected by SIPPe 33 results, we calculated changes in global energy. This step was repeated for three models: 6VW1, 2AJF and 6M17. For this last model, we calculated the variation in terms of global energy in two conformations, using as reference models both: i) ACE2-spike chains B-E and ii) ACE2-Spike chains D-F. In order to estimate the effect of different ligands, we used the models 6VW1 form SIPPe as reference structure and receptor, and all
Spike models reported in this study as ligands. In a similar manner, other static models from SSIPe were used as models to estimate the variation in terms of free energy related to polymorphisms that map on the ACE2 dimerization interface and ACE2-B0AT binding interface. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.23.057042 doi: bioRxiv preprint Legends to Figures   Fig. 1 . 3D models of SARS-CoV-2 Spike/ACE2 complex, and effects of ACE2 glysosylation on binding interfaces. a 3D model of SARS-CoV-2 Spike/ACE2/B0AT1 complex. The arrows indicate the principal binding interfaces between all proteins involved in this complex. b Domains and ACE2 amino acid residues involved the interaction with Spike. "Permanent" (red), "stable" (orange), "unstable" (green), and "hyper-unstable" residues are indicated. c FireDock was used to estimate ΔG values by using 2AJF (SARS-CoV Spike/ACE2 complex) and 6VW1 (SARS-CoV-2
Spike/ACE2 complex) after removal of the glycosydic chains (red bars) or the terminal beta- Oscillation plot of the distance between ACE2 amino acid residues mapping in the two helices that are involved in binding with Spike proteins. b 3D images of regions containing the amino acid residues shown in panel a. c Variance of the distance between ACE2 amino acid residues mapping in the two helices that are involved in binding with Spike proteins. d-e Oscillation plot of the distance between the two helices and beta-sheet (d), and between the residues of the beta-sheet (e).
f-g Variance of the distance of amino acid residues between the two helices and beta-sheet (f), and between the residues of the beta-sheet (g). showing the results of SNPs that mapping outside the ACE2 interfaces.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.23.057042 doi: bioRxiv preprint
