Background: With the spreading global pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 there has been disruption to normal clinical activity in response to the increased demand on health services.
There are reports of a reduction in non-Covid-19 emergency presentations. Consequentially, there are concerns that deaths from non-Covid-19 causes could increase. We examined recent reported population-based mortality rates, compared with expected rates, and compared any excess in deaths with the number of deaths attributed to Covid-19.
Methods: National agency and death registration reports were searched for numbers of deaths attributed to Covid-19 and overall mortality that had been publicly reported by 22 April 2020. Data on the number of deaths attributed to Covid-19, the total number of deaths registered in the population and the historical average over at least 3 years were collected. Data were available for 3 Northern European countries (England & Wales, Scotland and the Netherlands) and New York State, United States of America.
There was an increase in observed, compared with expected, mortality in Scotland (+73%), England and Wales (+49%), the Netherlands (+65%) and New York state (+34%). Of these deaths, only 65% in Scotland, 68 % in England and Wales, 49% in the Netherlands and 73% in New York state were attributed to Covid-19 leaving a number of excess deaths not attributed to Covid-19.
Since the first report of a novel pneumonic illness in Wuhan, China, in December 2019, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-Cov-2) has spread globally causing a pandemic that, at the time of writing, has infected approximately 2.6 million people and resulted in over 180,000 deaths attributed to the illness it causes, coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19). 1,2 Most official reports of Covid-19-related mortality are based on hospital data with variable inclusion of deaths in the community, possibly resulting in under-recognition of the full impact of SARS-Cov-2 on population death rates. The huge influx of Covid-19 patients into hospitals in affected countries has led to disruption of usual clinical activity, with cancellation of elective in-patient and outpatient activity. [3] [4] [5] In many cases, normal ambulatory care has been replaced by remote management using a variety of telemedicine approaches. 6 Even non-Covid-19 related emergency department activity has decreased markedly in many countries, as reported in a previous Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome outbreak. 7,8 As a result, there is concern that deaths from non-Covid-19 causes could increase, due to reduced routine care. One way to address these two questions is to examine recent observed population-based mortality rates, compared with expected rates, and compare any excess in deaths with the number of deaths attributed to Covid-19. We have analysed these data for 4 countries which have provided such data on a routine basis for at least 5 years.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.21.20073114 doi: medRxiv preprint
We examined recent changes in population mortality following the outbreak of Covid-19 in Northern European Countries with similar population characteristics, universal health care systems and rapid and complete reporting of data on deaths. The countries identified also had outbreaks of starting at approximately the same time. We included the constituent countries of the United Kingdom which collect, collate and report national data separately (for the purposes of this report, England and Wales were considered one country as their data are reported together) and the Netherlands in this analysis. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.21.20073114 doi: medRxiv preprint deaths to calculate the number of non-Covid-19 defined excess deaths. Numbers of deaths were also converted into a rates per million population using 2018 mid-year population estimates and 95% confidence intervals computed. For England and Wales age specific deaths were reported and in a subgroup analysis we explored the relationship between age and excess deaths in England and Wales. Deaths were categorised according to the following age groups, <45, 45-64, 65-74, 75-84 and ≥85. These categories were used as historical data on deaths was available in these age categories.
All analyses were carried out using Stata software, version 16 (StataCorp, College Station, TX, USA).
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. 
Scotland: There were 2368 excess deaths in Scotland in the period 30 March to 19 April 2020 compared to the same period in 2015-2019 (an increase of 73%). Of these excess deaths only 1544 (65%) were recorded as related to Covid-19 ( Figure 1) 
In the Netherlands the number of deaths increased from an expected 8798 (based on the prior 5year average) to 14505 (65% increase) over the period 23 March to 12 April 2020. Of the 5640 excess deaths, 2817 (49%) were related to Covid-19. As a result, the overall death rate rose from an expected 511 per million (95% CI 501 to 522) to 843 per million of population (95% CI 829 to 856).
The rate of Covid-19-related deaths was 164 per million (95% CI 158 to 170), and the rate of excess deaths not attributed to Covid-19 was 168 per million of population (95% CI 162 to 174).
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. 
In this study of countries currently affected by the Covid-19 pandemic, the data we analysed clearly show that there has been a substantial increase (ranging from 34 to 84%) in observed, compared with expected, mortality at a population level. The increase in mortality is not wholly explained by deaths attributed to Covid-19. Indeed, only between 49 and 73% of the excess in deaths can be explained by official Covid-19 reports. The data from New York state support these findings, with an even more striking picture in New York city. The two most likely explanations for the discrepancy between the overall excess of deaths and the extra deaths not explained by Covid-19 are either there are additional deaths caused (or contributed to) by Covid-19, but not recognised as such, or that there is an increase in deaths from non-Covid-19 causes, potentially resulting from diminished routine diagnosis and treatment of other conditions. We believe that both are likely. In many reports of mortality attributed to Covid-19, the focus has been on deaths occurring in hospital. Similarly, in some countries due to limited testing for SARS-Cov-2 infection, deaths among elderly people in care homes and other places potentially caused (or contributed to) by Covid-19 are not attributed to that condition. 13 Interestingly, in England and Wales, where data were available by age category, the proportion of excess deaths attributed to Covid-19 was smallest in the oldest age group, possibly because more frequent underlying comorbidity made the cause less certain in those individuals or made it easier to ascribe an alternative cause of death.
There are anecdotal reports of people with Covid-19-like symptoms frightened to attend hospital or choosing to remain at home because of fear of dying in isolation from their family in hospital.
The latter behaviours may also be relevant to deaths from non-Covid-19 causes. Not only has elective clinical activity almost ceased in many countries but emergency presentations have also declined markedly 8 and or some conditions, for example acute coronary syndromes, this could have fatal consequences. 5,14 Rates of primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PPCI) have declined and even where PPCI services have continued, disruption of normal working, including staff . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.21.20073114 doi: medRxiv preprint shortages due to illness or redeployment, and even donning personal protection equipment may have lengthened time to reperfusion. Even return to use of thrombolysis has been mooted. 15 The same considerations apply to acute stroke. 16 There has also been concern about re-supply of essential medicines to patients and even the impact of public discussion of the safety ACE inhibitors and ARBs which are life-saving treatments in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction and in high-risk survivors of myocardial infarction. 17 Similar concerns have also been raised about patients with cancer, chronic kidney disease and diabetes, for obvious reasons. 18-20 All of these are diseases of older age and therefore it is unsurprising that we found that only the youngest individuals were not affected by this excess. If not already, in due course, mental health problems and domestic violence may also add to the non-Covid-19 excess in mortality, although reduction in industrial deaths, fatal road traffic accidents and deaths related to air pollution may offset increases from these other causes. 21, 22 This may also explain why we have not observed an excess of non-Covid-19 deaths in those <45 years where deaths due to causes other than ischaemic heart disease or cancer represent a greater proportion of deaths.
Our analysis of three European countries, with New York state and city added for comparison, was driven by availability of the required data. It would have been of interest to include Italy and Spain in these analyses. Data on overall mortality were available for some regions in Italy: in the North, most affected by the pandemic, there was a 65% increase in the numbers of deaths observed, compared to expected, in the period from the time of the first reported Covid-19 case to the beginning of April. 23 Similar data for Central and Southern regions, areas less affected by the pandemic, showed a 10% increase in the observed number of deaths, compared to expected. We could not obtain Spanish national data for the dates of our analysis in the other countries and Spain is also in a different phase of its Covid-19 outbreak. However, Spanish data for the period 17 March to 20 April 2020, spanning the peak weeks of the pandemic in that country, show a substantial increase in the number of deaths observed, compared to expected. 24 Unlike the other countries we studied, most of the excess mortality was attributed to Covid-19. However, we are unsure as to the procedures for . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. What are the implications of these findings and why is it important to highlight them now rather than wait for the more granular information that will become available in time? We believe that the public health message to "stay at home" needs to be more nuanced, with an equally clear message to patients with symptoms suggestive of an acute coronary syndrome, stroke and worsening of chronic heart failure to still seek urgent medical attention. This may need reconfiguration of . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. Similarly, our findings reinforce the necessity of efforts being made to adapt ambulatory secondary care, and primary care, services to enable the continued delivery of essential treatment to high risk patients with chronic diseases and the triage of newly presenting individuals with potentially lifethreatening conditions. Few countries currently report mortality data quickly enough to allow identification of the excess in deaths we have highlighted. Rapid reporting of deaths should not be difficult and is essential to identify a problem like this, early, and the impact of efforts to diminish it.
Similarly, there is a need to standardise reporting of mortality during the pandemic, as discussed above. If done quickly, this will allow facilitate cross-country comparisons of approaches to containment and identification of successes and failures that might help guide global strategies. If there is an excess of non-Covid-19 deaths and non-fatal events due to inaccessible or suboptimal healthcare during the pandemic, the effects on long-term total mortality (and morbidity) may be farreaching and sustained monitoring will be required to demonstrate their abatement. Such data will be crucial for future planning.
Our analysis has several limitations. We relied on publicly available data that are collected and In summary, a substantial proportion of excess deaths observed during the current COVID-19 pandemic are not attributed to COVID-19. This may indicate an increase in non-COVID-19 deaths due . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. We searched PubMed on April 22, 2020, using the search terms "mortality", "death", and "covid-19". We searched for studies published in English. While there have been multiple reports of reductions in admissions to hospitals or attendances at emergency departments during the Covid-19 pandemic, it is not known whether this avoidance of healthcare has translated into higher mortality from non-Covid-19 at a population level.
In 4 countries in Northern Europe (Scotland, England and Wales and the Netherlands) and New York State USA, the number of deaths recorded during the Covid-19 pandemic exceeded the expected rate of death based on the prior mortality rates. These excess deaths were not all attributed to Covid-19 indicating an excess of non-Covid-19 deaths during the pandemic.
Measures aimed at managing the current Covid-19 pandemic may need to be modified to ensure that there is not an excess of non-Covid-19 deaths a result of Covid-19 suppressing measures.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.21.20073114 doi: medRxiv preprint
