Bats are recognized as important reservoirs of viruses deadly to other mammals, including humans. These infections are typically nonpathogenic in bats raising questions about innate immune differences that might exist between bats and other mammals. Tetherin is an important restriction factor which inhibits the release of a diverse range of viruses from host cells, including retroviruses, coronaviruses, filoviruses, and paramyxoviruses, some of which are deadly to humans and transmitted by bats. Here we characterise the tetherin genes from 27 species of bats, revealing that they are under strong selective pressure, and that fruit bats and vesper bats express unique structural variants of the tetherin protein. The expression of two computationally predicted splice isoforms of fruit bat tetherin is verified here, and we identify an additional third unique splice isoform which includes a C-terminal region that is not homologous to known mammalian tetherin variants. We also report that vesper bats possess and express at least five tetherin genes, including structural variants, a greater number than any other mammal reported to date.
These findings support the hypothesis of differential antiviral gene evolution in bats relative to other mammals.
Bats are reservoirs of viruses that are highly pathogenic to other mammals, including humans. Viruses such as Hendra, Nipah, Ebola, Marburg, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronaviruses (SARS-CoV-1 and likely also SARS-CoV-2), and the Sosuga virus have crossed species barriers from bats into humans (1) (2) (3) (4) . Laboratory studies demonstrate that specific bat species can be infected with Ebola, Marburg, SARS-CoV-1, Hendra, and Nipah viruses without showing clinical symptoms (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) . Recently, this has led to efforts to elucidate if there are differences observed between the antiviral strategies of bats and other mammals (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) . These studies have identified that genes related to immunity in bats are under a significant degree of positive selection, in addition to differences in the copy number and diversity of innate immune genes of bats relative to other mammals (11) (12) (13) (14) 16) .
Tetherin (BST-2, CD317) is a mammalian restriction factor, an antiviral protein that inhibits the release of diverse enveloped viral particles from the cells in which they are produced (17) (18) (19) . These viruses include retroviruses, coronaviruses, filoviruses, and paramyxoviruses, some of which are transmissible by bats (20, 21) . Tetherin is a membrane-associated glycoprotein and its activity is determined by its structure, rather than its primary amino acid sequence (22, 23) . Tetherin has been shown to possess a secondary role in immune signaling events by triggering the NF-κB signaling pathway, leading to stimulation of the antiviral interferon response (24) (25) (26) (27) .
In humans, tetherin is expressed across most cell types, including its BST-2 namesake bone marrow stromal cells, and expression may be upregulated by stimulation with type I interferons (28-30). Tetherin is a dimeric dual-anchor type II membrane protein that contains one protein anchor, a transmembrane domain near its N-terminus, an extracellular coiled-coil domain, and a glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI) lipid anchor, which is attached to its C-terminus as a post-translational modification (31) (32) (33) . Tetherin contains a number of conserved cytosine and asparagine motifs within the extracellular domain, with respective roles in dimerisation and glycosylation, and a dual-tyrosine motif Introduction (Y·x·Y) in its cytoplasmic region, which has a role in viral particle endocytosis and immune signaling cascades (25, 34) . Tetherin is located in lipid rafts at the plasma membrane where many viral particles bud during acquisition of their host membrane-derived viral envelopes (33) . During the viral budding process one anchor remains embedded in the nascent viral envelope while the other remains attached to the plasma membrane, tethering the virion to the cell and preventing its release into the extracellular environment (22, 32) .
Tetherin is common to all mammals, and orthologs which share structural and functional, but not sequence similarity, exist in other vertebrates (23) . Most mammals carry only a single tetherin gene; however gene duplication has been observed in sheep, cows, opossums and wallabies (23, 35) . Furthermore, human tetherin is expressed in two alternative isoforms (24) , the long (l-tetherin) and short (s-tetherin) isoforms, which differ through the truncation of 12 amino acid residues at the N-terminus of l-tetherin.
Computational predictions also indicate two additional isoforms, X1 and X2, with an internal, rather than N-terminal difference in amino acid sequences, may also be expressed in fruit bats i.e. megabats of the suborder Yinpterochiroptera, genus Pteropus (19) . The predicted isoform X1 is homologous to human l-tetherin, and the X2 isoform is a splice variant which contains a 7 AA exclusion within the extracellular coiled-coil domain relative to isoform X1. A recent analysis of tetherin in fruit bats has identified that, similar to other mammals, bat tetherin is a functional restriction factor capable of inhibiting the release of the bat-hosted Nipah virus, as well as virus-like particles (VLPs) produced from the Ebola virus and the human immunodeficiency virus (19) .
We hypothesized that given the role of bats as hosts of pathogenic enveloped viruses, and the differences observed in other antiviral genes of their innate immune system (13) , that diversity might also exist in the tetherin genes of bats. Here we report that fruit bats possess a unique structural isoform in addition to the two computational predictions, tetherin isoforms X1 and X2, which were generated through the automated NCBI annotation pipeline from the published P. alecto genome (11) . We also find that vesper bats, i.e. microbats of the suborder Yangochiroptera, genus Myotis, possess at least five Introduction 5 tetherin genes, two of which contain large structural differences in the extracellular coiled-coil domain. An analysis of the tetherin genes of 27 species of bats reveal that bat tetherin has been subjected to strong positive selection, indicating these flying mammals have experienced evolutionary pressure on this important antiviral gene. Taken together, these findings indicate that bats have undergone tetherin gene expansion and diversification relative to other mammals, supporting the hypothesis of differential antiviral gene evolution in bats.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint
To advance our understanding of bat tetherin homologs, we mined all available publically accessible sequence read archives representing 26 species of bats through a BLASTn analysis ( Table 1 ). The species analysed here represent 8 of the 20 families within the order Chiroptera: three families (Hipposideridae, Pteropodidae, and Rhinolophidae) from within the suborder Yinpterochiroptera, and five families (Emballonuridae, Miniopteridae, Molossidae, Vespertilionidae, and Phyllostomidae) from within the suborder Yangochiroptera. This analysis revealed mRNA sequences representing homologs of human tetherin from 26 bat species, enabling the generation of a consensus bat tetherin sequence from a multiple sequence alignment ( Figure 1A and SI Data 1). The primary sequence lengths range from 177 to 221 AA, compared to 180 AA for human l-tetherin, and of these only 23 residues were conserved in 100% of the bat tetherin sequences analysed ( Figure 1B ). The assembled tetherin sequence for all bats was a homolog of human l-tetherin, except for the Black-bearded Tomb bat (Taphozous melanopogon), which was predicted to possess an equivalent of the human s-tetherin.
The predicted T. melanopogon tetherin nucleotide sequence contains two key mutations upstream of its short isoform start site: an ATG to CTG change in the long isoform start codon, and a TAG stop codon in between the two start codon sites, either of which would be sufficient to prevent the production of the long isoform of tetherin. No nucleotide conflicts exist between the 17 reads mapping to this region of the T. melanopogon tetherin sequence, indicating that these mutations are unlikely to represent sequencing or consensus alignment errors.
The dual-tyrosine Y·x·Y motif, which is critical for mediating viral-particle endocytosis and is involved in immune signaling cascades (25, 34), is variable among bat species and exists in various combinations of Y|C·x·Y|H ( Figure 1A and 1C). All bat species possess at least one tyrosine residue within this motif ( Figure 1C) . Conservation of the protein domain organization and key structural motifs of bat tetherin, despite significant amino acid sequence diversity, supports the present understanding of tetherin as a protein whose functions are mediated through structural rather than sequence-mediated interactions (22) .
To assess the evolutionary pressure applied during the speciation of bats, a selection test was performed to analyze bat tetherin genes spanning ~65 mya of Chiropteran history.
The analysis revealed that overall, bat tetherin genes have been subjected to positive selection, with an average ratio of non-synonymous (dN) to synonymous (dS) mutations, dN/dS, of 1.125 over the Chiropteran phylogeny, with numerous specific positions subjected to a large degree of positive selection, with dN/dS values of 2.626 -2.668 (Table   2 ). These sites are predominantly located in the transmembrane domain and the regions of the cytoplasmic and extracellular domains immediately adjacent to the transmembrane domain ( Figure 1A ). This analysis suggests the presence of evolutionary pressure exerted on tetherin, by viral antagonists or countermeasures that target residues in the tetherin, following the speciation of the Chiropteran family. The apparent ubiquity of tetherin among bats, in concert with significant sequence diversity and evidence of strong positive selection pressures operating on each species, supports the notion that tetherin plays a major role in the antiviral repertoire of bats.
Fruit bats possess unique structural isoforms of the tetherin protein generated through alternative splicing of a single tetherin gene
The expression of the fruit bat tetherin gene was initially assessed by a BLASTn search within the transcriptome of an Australian fruit bat, the Black flying fox, Pteropus alecto, using the human tetherin amino acid sequence as the search query. We identified 30 contigs matching the query (lowest E-value = 9.21 x 10 -23 ). A single P. alecto homolog of tetherin, herein described as isoform A, homologous to human l-tetherin and the predicted X1 isoform (GenBank: XM_006904279), was identified. P. alecto Tetherin isoform A has a low level of primary amino acid sequence conservation (37%) compared Results 8 to human l-tetherin ( Figure 2A ) and other mammalian (28 -47%) tetherin sequences homologous to human l-tetherin ( Figure 2B ). Despite the low amino acid sequence identity, the predicted secondary structures and protein domains are largely conserved between bats and other mammals ( Figure 2B ), with all tetherin proteins containing the cytoplasmic (CD), transmembrane (TM), extracellular domains (ED), and the posttranslationally cleaved GPI-anchor signal peptide (GSP). An exception to this is the tetherin B of sheep, which does not contain the GSP domain.
To verify the expression of bat tetherin isoform A, a cDNA library was prepared from P. alecto spleen tissue, comprising a number of immune cell types, and assessed for the presence of transcripts matching that identified in the P. alecto transcriptome. Primers were designed to flank the open reading frame of tetherin isoform A, and amplicons were generated by PCR. Amplicons were then cloned into plasmid vectors to allow for DNA sequencing. This analysis revealed two additional isoforms of tetherin, isoforms B & C.
Isoform B was found to be homologous to the computationally predicted isoform X2 (GenBank: XM_015587122). Both isoforms B and C are predicted to contain structural differences relative to isoform A. They both possess a 7 AA exclusion in the middle of the extracellular domain while isoform C is additionally predicted to contain an alternative Cterminus, without the GSP domain ( Figure 2B ). The absence of a GSP domain suggests that it is unlikely that parallel homodimers of isoform C would possess the capacity to tether viral particles to the cell.
Mapping the tetherin cDNA sequences against the P. alecto genome identified a single tetherin gene located on Scaffold KB030270 ( Figure 3A ), between the MVB12A (multivesicular body subunit 12A) and PLVAP (plasmalemma vesicle associated protein) genes, similar to the human tetherin gene (Viewable in the Ensembl genome browser: http://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Location/View?db=core;g=ENSG00000130303; r=19:17402886-17405683). P. alecto Isoform B and C use an alternative splice acceptor site for the first intron, resulting in the 7 AA exclusion, while the distinct C-terminus of isoform C is a result of alternative mRNA splicing that incorporates exon 5 while excluding exon 4 used in isoform A and B ( Figure 3B ).
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint
To further investigate the diversity of tetherin in non-fruit bat species, we amplified the tetherin nucleotide sequences for the vesper bat species Myotis ricketti and Miniopterus schreibersii using primers designed on the basis of the predicted mRNA sequences (Table 3A) . These primers were used in a PCR analysis of cDNA samples generated from M. ricketti spleen tissue and a M. schreibersii kidney cell line to amplify the tetherin coding domain sequences (Table 3A) . Primers for M. ricketti were also used to analyse cDNA generated from an M. macropus kidney cell line as it was reasoned that given that these species belong to the same genus, primers designed for one might be capable of amplifying tetherin from the other. Following PCR, amplified DNA from M. ricketti, M. macropus, and M. schreibersii, were gel purified, cloned and sequenced.
These microbats were found to express various homologs of tetherin that include encoding of unique structural variations ( Figure 4A and 4B). The tetherin homolog of human l-tetherin predicted for M. schreibersii was detected ( Figure 4A ). Five unique tetherin variants, differing in their encoded primary amino acid sequences (tetherin A -E), were identified for M. macropus, two of which, tetherin A and B, were also detected in M. ricketti ( Figure 4A ). These tetherin variants encode three distinct homologs (tetherin A, C, D) of the human l-tetherin, sharing the same protein domains and secondary structures but differing in their primary amino acid sequence ( Figure 4B The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint extracellular domain ( Figure 4B ). Accordingly, it is predicted to lack the GPI signal peptide required for the post-translational addition of a GPI-anchor, also found for P. alecto tetherin isoform C ( Figure 2B ). The absence of a GPI anchor indicates that it is unlikely that homodimers of M. macropus tetherin C isoform B would possess the capacity to tether viral particles to the cell. M. macropus tetherin B and E were found to be structurally unique, possessing a large deletion of ~60 amino acids in the extracellular coiled-coil domain ( Figure 4B ), compared to the other tetherin homologs, which has been shown to be critical for viral particle restriction (22, 36) . This deletion results in the exclusion of the conserved disulphide bond-forming cysteine residues, and the conserved asparagine-linked glycosylation sites, indicating that this form of tetherin is unlikely to form dimers or be glycosylated in the manner of human tetherin (22, 37) . Figure 6A ) and
indicating the presence of a tetherin gene locus within this scaffold. The M. lucifugus tetherin gene locus was located between the MVB12A and PLVAP genes, as was found to be the case for the single P. alecto tetherin gene (Figures 3 and 6 ). 
To evaluate the function of bat tetherin proteins, we analysed tetherin from two Australian bats, the fruit bat P. alecto and the vesper bat M. macropus. The coding sequences of the P. alecto tetherin isoforms A, B, and C, and M. macropus tetherin A and B, were cloned into mammalian expression plasmids. While numerous vesper bat tetherins were identified in this study, M. macropus tetherin A and tetherin B were selected for further analysis as tetherin A is a homolog of human l-tetherin and tetherin B was the most structurally unique, since it possessed a large deletion within the extracellular coiled-coil domain compared to tetherin A ( Figure 4B ).
All tetherin coding sequences were modified with the addition of a haemagglutinin (HA) tag sequence (N-SGYPYDVPDYAGS-C) to enable antibody-based detection of protein expression. In all cases the HA tag was inserted at the position immediately following the end of the coiled-coil region of the extracellular domain ( Figure 1A ) which is the equivalent location to that which has been previously utilized in the tagging of human tetherin (22) . The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint
To validate the capacity of each tetherin plasmid construct to express tetherin protein, mammalian HEK293T (293T) cells, which do not express tetherin in the absence of type I interferon stimulation (17) , were transfected with bat tetherin expression constructs. Cell lysates were extracted using a method specific for GPI-anchored proteins (40) and tetherin expression was evaluated by non-reducing SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis ( Figure 7 ). P. alecto tetherin isoforms A and B were detected primarily as broad bands at the expected positions ~56-75 kDa while isoform C was present as both dimers and monomers (~32-35 kDa) ( Figure 7A ). The presence of broad/multiple bands in close proximity to each other likely reflects variable levels of tetherin glycosylation as previously reported for human tetherin (22) . M. macropus tetherin A was also detected as a dimer at the expected size of ~55 kDa while tetherin B was only detected as a monomer with a size of ~26 kDa ( Figure 7B ). These data show that all tetherin constructs are capable of expressing tagged tetherin proteins and that these proteins differ in their capacity to form the expected dimerised form of tetherin. Bat tetherin proteins that are homologous to human l-tetherin dimerise as expected, while the structurally unique tetherin proteins behave differently. In this regard, P. alecto tetherin isoform C generates similar amounts of dimers and monomers, while M. macropus tetherin B appears to exist exclusively as a monomer.
Human tetherin localises to the plasma membrane at sites of virus budding, in addition to membranes of the trans-Golgi network and recycling compartments (17, 41) . P. alecto tetherin isoform A displays a similar cellular localisation pattern as human tetherin ( Figure   8A and 8C), while isoform C is predominantly localised in the cytoplasm ( Figure 8E ). P. alecto tetherin isoform B demonstrates a fluorescence pattern with features shared by both isoforms A and B ( Figure 8D ).
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint Some, but not all tetherin proteins of P. alecto and M. macropus are capable of restricting the release of HIVΔVpu virus-like particles
The basic function of P. alecto and M. macropus tetherins to decrease viral particle release was tested against model HIV-1 virus-like particles (VLPs), which are known to be restricted by tetherin from non-human mammals including cats, sheep, and other bat species (Hypsignathus monstrosus and Epomops buettikoferi) (19, 42, 43) . 293T cells were transfected with bat tetherin constructs in addition to plasmids expressing HIVΔVpu VLPs that do not express Vpu, an antagonist of human tetherin (17) . P. alecto tetherin isoforms A and B restricted the release of HIVΔVpu VLPs, while isoform C did not ( Figure 9A ). M. macropus tetherin A also restricted HIVΔVpu VLP release from 293T cells, however tetherin B was unable to inhibit HIVΔVpu VLP egress ( Figure 9B ). These data indicate that, with the exception of P. alecto tetherin isoform C and M. macropus tetherin B, tagged bat tetherin proteins are functionally capable of restricting the release of HIV-1 particles from mammalian cells in the absence of Vpu.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint
To advance our understanding of the differences between the innate antiviral defenses of bats relative to other mammals, we analysed the genes and expressed transcripts of tetherin from diverse bat genera and species within the family Chiroptera. We found that in all but one species, bats possess and express a tetherin protein homologous to the long isoform of human tetherin (l-tetherin). In addition, we found that P. alecto expresses three isoforms from a single tetherin gene, and that vesper bats (genus Myotis) encode five, and possibly as many as seven, distinct tetherin genes.
The one bat species, T. melanopogon, that lacked the human l-tetherin homolog, possessed an equivalent of the short isoform of human tetherin (s-tetherin), an observation also reported for cats (44) . In a study of feline tetherin, short isoformexclusivity was found to improve viral restriction and decrease sensitivity to tetherin antagonism by HIV-1 Vpu when compared to an engineered long isoform version of feline tetherin (44) . Conversely, the feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), which is adapted to the feline host, is not restricted by either long or short isoforms of feline tetherin (44) .
In humans, l-tetherin acts as a virus sensor which induces NF-κB signaling in contrast to stetherin, which lacks the dual tyrosine motif required for eliciting this innate immune response (24, 25) . The findings presented here suggest that if bat tetherin proteins are confirmed to similarly mediate cytoplasmic domain-mediated immune signaling, then the Black-bearded Tomb bat, which only encodes a homolog of s-tetherin, would be predicted not to mediate this effect.
Bat tetherin amino acid sequences were found to be highly variable. The predicted protein lengths range from 177 to 221 AA (human l-tetherin is 180 AA) and of these, only 23 amino acid residues were found to be conserved in 100% of the 27 bat tetherin sequences analysed ( Figure 1B ). Among these are the structurally important cysteine and asparagine residues which are responsible for tetherin dimerisation and glycosylation, respectively (45, 46) . The dual-tyrosine motif, responsible for mediating viral particle endocytosis and immune signaling (25, 34) , was found to exist as a variable Y|C·x·Y|H . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint motif across the bat tetherin variants analysed. All bats maintained at least one of the two tyrosine residues. This observation is significant because mutational studies of human tetherin have demonstrated that the dual tyrosines provide redundancy for both the endocytic and signaling activities, which are maintained so long as either tyrosine is present (25, 34).
To understand the evolutionary selective pressures on tetherin genes across bat species, a selection test was performed that revealed that bat tetherin genes are under strong positive selection with amino acid positions in and around the transmembrane domain being the region under the strongest selective pressure (Table 2 and Figure 1A ). This is in agreement with previous reports that primate tetherin possess multiple sites under positive selection in this same region (47) . The driver of positive selection in the case of primate tetherin is antagonism by viral counter-measures including HIV-1 Vpu (47). Venkatesh et al. (48) demonstrated that the configuration that tetherin dimers adopt during viral particle retention primarily consists of the GPI-anchor being embedded in the viral envelope and the transmembrane domain remaining attached to the cellular membrane. If this paradigm holds true for bat tetherin, then it follows that the tetherincell membrane interface is the major site of tetherin antagonism in bats and it would be reasonable to speculate that the drivers of this selection are viral antagonists analogous in the mode of interaction, if not structure or function, to lentiviral tetherin antagonists.
We amplified tetherin from spleen-derived cDNA of the Australian fruit bat, P. alecto, and confirmed the expression of the two computationally predicted splice variants (isoforms A [X1] and B [X2]), and additionally identified the expression of a third isoform of tetherin, isoform C. Mapped against the P. alecto genome, all three isoforms were found to be derived from the alternative splicing of a single tetherin gene ( Figure 3B ). P. alecto tetherin isoform B was found to possess a 7 AA exclusion within the extracellular coiledcoil domain relative to isoform A, while isoform C is predicted to harbor the same 7 AA exclusion and an alternative C-terminus, that lacks the GSP predicted to be present in tetherin isoforms A and B which is necessary for the post-translational addition of the GPI-anchor. This is important because studies of human tetherin have demonstrated that . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint the presence of a GPI-anchor is essential for restricting the release of viral particles (22, 36) . Sheep and cows have been reported to possess a duplication of the tetherin gene (35, 43) . In sheep, the duplicate tetherin, named tetherin B, similarly does not encode a GSP, and studies of sheep tetherin B function reveal that while it is capable of limited restriction of VLPs, it is significantly less potent than sheep tetherin A (43) . The mechanism of its function is unknown and its C-terminal amino acid sequence is entirely dissimilar from that of P. alecto tetherin isoform C. One possible function of additional isoforms of tetherin is to expand the viral target range of bats by undefined mechanisms that are active in the absence of a GPI anchor.
Intriguingly, one of the non-transmembrane domain-associated sites under strong positive selection across tetherin from bats is located in the middle of the extracellular domain. This is the site that distinguishes the P. alecto tetherin isoforms A and B, with the 7 AA exclusion at this location in isoform B. This suggests that the expression of P. alecto tetherin isoform B as an alternative to isoform A, and possibly also M. macropus tetherin B and E, which differ from tetherin A through a large 60 AA deletion in the same region, is to express a form of tetherin that does not include a sequence motif that appears to be a possible site of viral antagonism. This hypothesis may be supported by future experiments aimed at identifying viral antagonists of P. alecto tetherin isoform A that are ineffective against isoform B.
The microbat M. macropus was found to express five different tetherin genes, tetherin A, The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint
The expression of the P. alecto tetherin isoforms A, B, and C, and M. macropus tetherin A and B, reveals differences in their relative capacities to form homodimers under our assay conditions (Figure 7 ). This observation is notable because the capacity of tetherin to form cysteine-linked dimers is required for the restriction of HIV-1 viral particles (46) which we chose as the VLPs against which bat tetherin proteins were functionally validated for inhibiting viral particle release. In contrast to restriction of HIV-1, Sakuma et al. (49) have reported that tetherin dimerisation is not required for the restriction of arenaviruses and filoviruses, suggesting that the need for dimerisation is virus/VLP-dependent.
The bat tetherins that we assessed for function which were most similar to human l-tetherin, P. alecto tetherin isoforms A and B, and M. macropus tetherin A, were all found to predominantly form dimers. This was shown by non-reducing SDS-PAGE size separation and subsequent Western blot analysis in which a detectable signal was observed almost exclusively at the expected size of tetherin dimers (Figure 7 ). In contrast, P. alecto tetherin isoform C was present in similar amounts in both the dimeric and monomeric forms ( Figure 7A ). This observation is surprising because P. alecto tetherin isoform C contains all of the conserved cysteine residues and the same extracellular coiled-coil domain as isoforms A and B. The distinct C-terminal region in isoform C is the result of an alternative splicing event that also causes the loss of the final three amino acid residues of the coiledcoil region possessed by isoforms A and B. Additionally, the inserted HA tag is located in the position immediately following then coiled-coil domain. It is possible that the absence of the three terminal amino acid residues in the coiled-coil domain of isoform C relative to isoform A and B accounts for the difference in relative extents of dimerisation.
Alternatively, the observed extent of dimerisation of isoform C may be an artifact of the method used to process the samples for analysis and may not be reflective of the extent of dimerisation in situ. It is also important to note that we cannot currently rule out the possibility that the insertion of the HA tag in between the coiled-coil domain and the alternative C-terminal sequence might be responsible for the observed reduction in dimerisation. M. macropus tetherin B was observed exclusively as a monomer ( Figure 7B ).
The monomeric exclusivity of M. macropus tetherin B can be explained by the loss of all . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint conserved cysteine residues necessary for dimerisation within the 60 AA deletion in the extracellular coiled-coil domain of tetherin B (Figure 4 ).
Given the differing extent of homodimer formation for each bat tetherin and the reports that dimerisation is important for the restriction of some viruses and not required for others (46, 49) , it is likely that these differences might affect the extent by which each tetherin is capable of restricting various VLPs. Tetherin function was validated through an assessment of the capacity of P. alecto tetherin isoforms A, B, and C, and M. macropus tetherins A and B to restrict the release of HIVΔVpu VLPs. P. alecto tetherin isoforms A and B were capable of restricting the release of HIVΔVpu VLPs, in contrast to isoform C which lacked restriction activity ( Figure 9A ). M. macropus tetherin A restricted HIVΔVpu VLP release, while tetherin B did not ( Figure 9B ). These findings are consistent with the expected effects of tetherin dimerisation on the restriction of HIVΔVpu VLPs (46) .
Previous reports on the necessity of the tetherin GPI anchor for inhibition of viral particle release (22, 36) indicates that the lack of a GPI anchor on isoform C would likely result in an inability to restrict viral egress from the host cell. However, sheep tetherin B, which does not possess a GPI-signal peptide ( Figure 2B ) is capable of limited restriction of betaretroviral VLPs through an unknown mechanism (43) . This may indicate that isoform C either has an antiviral range that does not include HIVΔVpu VLPs, or that it does not have any antiviral function at all. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint resulted in the expansion and diversification of tetherin genes in vesper bats of the genus Myotis, and the emergence of unique splice variants of tetherin in the fruit bat P. alecto, supporting the hypothesis of differential antiviral gene evolution in bats.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint
Sequence read archive (SRA) BLAST analysis
To predict the tetherin sequences of other bat species, the P. alecto tetherin isoform A coding domain nucleotide sequence (549 nt) was used as the search query for a separate BLASTn analysis of each of the publically accessible sequence read archives (SRA) of bat transcriptomes (Table 1 ). This approach allowed the individual assembly of a tetherin homolog from each bat species for which a transcriptome sequence read archive was available. The BLASTn analyses were performed using the online SRA Nucleotide BLAST tool 
To determine if evolutionary selective pressures were being applied to bat tetherin, a selection test was performed. To detect the positively selected sites among bat tetherin sequences, a maximum likelihood (ML) phylogeny was generated with CODEML implemented in PAML4 software (50) . The input tree was generated based on a pre-existing bat species 
To confirm the predicted tetherin nucleotide sequences and identify functional domains within bat tetherin protein sequences, translated coding domains were compared against known tetherin amino acid sequences including the human l-tetherin and the P. alecto To identify the homologs of tetherin in P. alecto, the human l-tetherin protein sequence The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint interest, local tBLASTn analyses of the transcriptome of P. alecto were conducted with CLC using the following parameters: BLOSUM62 matrix, word size = 3, E-values < 1 x10 -12 , gap costs of existence 11, extension 1, with no filtering of regions of low complexity.
To amplify tetherin nucleotide sequences from bat cDNA, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays were performed using cDNA generated from P. alecto and M. ricketti spleen tissue, and M. macropus and M. schreibersii kidney cell lines, using various combinations of forward and reverse primers (Table 3A) . Primers were designed using the tetherin predictions identified in the contig and SRA analyses. Primers were designed to bind to the 5' and 3' untranslated regions of bat cDNA such that the full CDS could be amplified. Bat capture, tissue collection and RNA extraction was conducted as previously reported (56) with the exception that RNAlater (Ambion) preserved spleen tissue from four male adult bats was pooled before tissue homogenisation and followed with total RNA extraction with the Qiagen RNeasy Mini kit with on-column extraction of genomic DNA with DNase I. Total RNA was reverse transcribed into cDNA with the Qiagen Omniscript reverse transcriptase according to the manufacturer's protocol with the exception that the reaction contained 100 ng/μl total RNA, 1 μM oligo-dT18 (Qiagen) and 10 μM random hexamers (Promega).
All PCR amplification assays were performed using the Roche FastStart High Fidelity PCR system (Cat # 04738292001) with an annealing temperature gradient of 54°C to 64°C in 2°C increments. Each reaction was made up to a total of 20 μl, containing 1 unit of polymerase, 2 ng of total cDNA, and 8 pmol of each primer. All other parameters for PCR amplification were performed according to the manufacturer's protocol.
Amplicons from PCR reactions were analysed by agarose gel electrophoresis (57) . Individual DNA bands were physically excised from the gel. DNA was purified from the gel fragments The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint standard heat-shock method (57) . Plasmids were purified from these cultures using a Wizard Plus SV Miniprep DNA Purification kit (Promega). All inserted sequences were confirmed by Sanger sequencing using M13 forward and reverse primers (M13F and M13R; Table 3B ).
To identify tetherin genes within the genomes of P. alecto and M. macropus, local BLASTn analyses were performed using CLC. For these analyses the P. alecto and M. macropus 
To enable detection of tetherin expression, the P. alecto tetherin isoforms A, B, and C, and M. macropus tetherin A and B were genetically modified with the insertion of nucleotide sequences encoding the haemaggultinin (HA) antibody-binding epitopes. Tetherin sequences were modified through a 2-step PCR process. PCR reactions were performed using the Roche FastStart HighFidelity PCR kit according to the manufacturer's recommendations.
To express tetherin proteins in a mammalian cell culture system the tagged tetherin inserts were sub-cloned from the pCR2.1-TOPO (P. alecto tetherin isoforms A, B, and C) and pCR-. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint Blunt-II-TOPO (M. macropus tetherin A and B) vectors into pcDNA3.1 mammalian expression vectors. The HA-tagged tetherin constructs contained terminal enzyme restriction sites. P. alecto tetherin constructs contained XhoI and XbaI sites at their 5' and 3' ends, respectively.
M. macropus tetherin constructs contained an EcoRI site at each end. These sites, which are also present in the pcDNA3.1 vector, were used for digestion-ligation transfer of the HAtagged tetherin sequences into pcDNA3.1. The ligation reaction products were transformed into Top10 E. coli and plasmid clones were purified from E. coli colonies using the method described above. All inserted sequences were verified by Sanger sequencing using the pcDNA3.1 vector sequencing primers, T7F forward and BGHR reverse (Table 3B) .
To determine if the tetherin plasmids can express tetherin protein in a mammalian cell culture The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint into the same tube and centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 4 min. The supernatant of each sample was transferred to a new tube and warmed to 37°C. Samples were then centrifuged at 10,000
x g for 10 min to separate the samples into two fractions; the upper, detergent-depleted fraction containing hydrophilic, soluble proteins and the lower, detergent-enriched fraction containing hydrophobic, transmembrane-and GPI-anchored proteins, including tetherin. The upper fractions of each sample were carefully aspirated by pipetting and discarded. The protein content of each sample was then purified and concentrated by trichloracetic acid (TCA) precipitation. A 25% volume of 100% (w/v) TCA was added to each sample (i.e. for sample volumes estimated to be 200 μl, 50 μl of TCA was added) and incubated on ice for 10 min. Samples were centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 5 min. The supernatant of each sample was then discarded and the protein pellets were washed with 200 μl of ice cold acetone followed by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 5 min. The acetone wash was repeated once. The protein pellet was then dried on at 95°C for 5 min. Protein pellets were then resuspended in 20 μl of 4X SDS-PAGE sample buffer (Sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis sample buffer; 40% glycerol, 8% SDS, 240 mM Tris-Cl pH 6.8, 5% β-mercaptoethanol, 0.04% bromophenol blue). 
To visualise tetherin localization within cells, 500 ng of plasmids encoding HA-tagged human l-tetherin and P. alecto tetherin isoforms A, B, and C were transfected into HEK293T cells seeded on glass coverslips as described above. At 48 h post transfection, cells were fixed with . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint 4% paraformaldehyde (Sigma) in PBS for 10 min at room temperature, and then permeablised in 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 min at room temperature. Tetherin localisation in cells was detected by staining cells with anti-HA-tag rabbit monoclonal IgG (Thermo) diluted in 0.2% Triton X-100, 3% BSA in PBS for 1 h at room temperature. Cells were subsequently stained with anti-rabbit AlexaFlour 488 secondary IgG (Thermo) diluted in 0.2% Triton X-100, 3% BSA in PBS for 20 min at room temperature. Nuclei are blue stained with Hoechst 33342 (Thermo) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Coverslips were mounted onto glass slides with ProLong Gold Antifade Mountant (Thermo), then imaged on a Nikon AR1 confocal microscope and analysed with ImageJ (NIH) software. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint
The cells from each well were resuspended in 500 μl of PBS (-) and transferred to 1.5 ml tubes and centrifuged at 200 x g for 5 min. Supernatants were discarded and cell pellets were lysed in 100 μl of NP-40 lysis buffer. Following lysis samples were centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 5 min, supernatants were transferred to a new 1.5 ml tubes and cell debris pellets were discarded. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 1 . Bat Tetherin structure and sequence diversity. A. The consensus bat tetherin amino acid sequence generated through the multiple sequence alignment of tetherin from 27 bat species (SI Data 1) and compared against human tetherin. Strong positive selection of bat tetherin is revealed by the ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous mutations (Table 2) , and is represented as evolutionary hotspots. The YxY dual tyrosine motif, the alternative start site for the short isoform of tetherin, and the GPI anchor attachment site positions are indicated by arrows. The red asterisk (*) indicates the location of the inserted molecular tags in the P. alecto and M. macropus tetherin expression constructs. CD, cytoplasmic domain; TM, transmembrane domain; ED, extracellular domain; GPI, glycophosphatidylinositol; GSP, GPI signal peptide. B. Significant sequence diversity exists among bat tetherin proteins, indicated by the percentage of amino acid sequence conservation at each site of the consensus bat tetherin. Amino acids conserved in all 27 sequences are represented by their letters. Amino acids represented by X are variable and are included to indicate the sequence distance between closely positioned conserved residues. C. The consensus bat tetherin sequence. Amino acid residues represented in > 50% of bat tetherin sequences are indicated with their letter. Positions at which no amino acid residue is represented in > 50% of bat tetherin sequences are indicated with 'X'. The red line indicates the position of the dual tyrosine motif. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 5 . Pairwise comparisons between human and bat tetherin variants. A. Myotis macropus tetherin A, C, and D. B. M. macropus tetherin B and E analysed separately to A, C and D to account for the inclusion of 60 AA in M. macropus tetherin A, C, and D that is otherwise removed following gap treatment of the alignment of M. macropus B and E. Protein sequences of human and bat tetherins were aligned and gaps were removed. The horizontal axis represents percentage identity between pairs of amino acid sequences, coloured with a white to red gradient indicating increasing similarity as red intensity increases. The vertical axis represents the number of amino acid residue identity differences between sequence pairs, coloured with a white to blue gradient indicating increasing difference as blue intensity increases. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint Tables . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.031203 doi: bioRxiv preprint 45 Table 4 . Primers used for the generation of haemagglutinin-tagged Pteropus alecto and Myotis macropus tetherin expression constructs through a 2-Step PCR process.
