Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2
organisms showed that synonymous codons are not used uniformly within and between genes of one genome. This phenomenon called synonymous codon usage bias (SCUB) or codon usage bias (CUB) [11] [12] [13] [14] . Further, the degree of the unequal use of synonymous codons differs between species [15, 16] . Hence, each organism has its optimal codons, where an optimal codon is defined as a codon which is more frequently used in highly expressed genes than in the slightly expressed genes [17] . Two main factors shape the codon usage of an organism mutation and selection [18] [19] [20] . Other factors also known to influence the CUB of an organism are nucleotide composition [21] , synonymous substitution rate [22] , tRNA abundance [23] , codon hydropathy and DNA replication initiation sites [24] , gene length [25] , and expression level [26] . Since viruses rely on the tRNA pool of their hosts in the translation process, previous studies suggest that translational selection and/or directional mutational pressure act on the codon usage of the viral genome to optimize or deoptimize it towards the codon usage of their hosts [27, 28] . Hence, it is important to examine viral gene structures and compositions at the codon or nucleotide level to reveal the mechanisms of virus-host relationships and virus evolution [29] .
Studying the codon usage in RNA viruses in general help in understanding the evolutionary history of viruses and the evolutionary forces that shape the viral genome, which might assist in understanding the characteristics of newly emerging viruses. Moreover, a study on Influenza A virus (IAV) [30] suggested that understanding codon usage and its nucleotide content in viruses may help in creating new vaccines using Synthetic Attenuated Virus Engineering (SAVE). By deoptimizing viral codons it might be possible to attenuate a virus [31] . Another study reported that the replacement of natural codons with synonymous triplets with increased frequencies of CpG gives rise to inactivation of Poliovirus infectivity [32] , the same can be applied to IAV [33] .
To our knowledge, no attempts have been made to understand the forces (mutation and/or selection) influencing the overall CUB in SARS-CoV-2 coding regions. This study aims to investigate the codon usage bias and factors affecting them in all coding regions (CDS) of Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) from 13 different countries.
The latter may help in better understanding the molecular evolution regarding the codon usage and nucleotides composition of SARS-CoV-2. Also, the codon usage for SARS-CoV-2 was compared to the host codon usage, to examine the virus in relation to its host coadaptation (Homo sapiens).
All the CDS for the complete genomes were obtained from the NCBI virus portal (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/labs/virus/vssi/#/). In this study, 13 isolates of Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) were picked from different countries (USA, Pakistan, Spain, Vietnam, Italy, India, Brazil, China, Sweden, Nepal, Taiwan, South Korea, and Australia) according to the most recent collection date and complete genome length. All information about the used isolates can be found in Supplementary file 1. For this study, isolates were named by their geo-location (country).
GC and AU nucleotide content was estimated for each isolate. As well as, GC and AU content in first, second and third codon positions, were used as a parameter for CUB to address the nucleotide composition effect.
A new index named Synonymous Dinucleotide Usage (SDU) has been developed [34] to implement a way to estimate the degree to which a host-driven force acting on the dinucleotide level of viral genomes has skewed the synonymous codon usage of the protein sequence. To examine the occurrences of a given dinucleotide to the null hypothesis that there is equal usage of synonymous codons. The SDU defines three positions for dinucleotide frames, a frame 1 as the first and second nucleotide codon positions, frame 2 as the second and third nucleotide codon positions, and a bridge frame as the third nucleotide codon position and the first nucleotide from a downstream codon on the same coding sequence. As frame 1 and 2 can change dinucleotides in a way without changing the amino acids of a protein sequence (Synonymous dinucleotides). The SDU values for all SARS-CoV-2 CDS tested isolates in this study were calculated using this equation:
where ni is the number of occurrences of amino acid i in the sequence, oi,j,h is the synonymous proportion of dinucleotide j in frame position h for amino acid i observed in the sequence,
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.019463 doi: bioRxiv preprint ei,j,h is the synonymous proportion of dinucleotide j in frame position h for amino acid or amino acid pair i expected under equal synonymous codon usage, and N it the total number of amino acids in the sequence. The result from SDU directly indicates the overall synonymous dinucleotide representation in each frame positions for the tested CDS. Where SDU value 1 means a dinucleotide in a given frame position is equal to the expected under equal synonymous codon usage. SDU more than 1 means the dinucleotide is over-represented in a given frame position compared to the excepted under the null hypothesis. Lastly, SDU within 0 and 1 show under-representation in the provided frame position, compared to the representation assumed under the null hypothesis. Using this index, the dinucleotide frequency in frame 2 (dinucleotide at position 2 and 3 in a codon) were measured for the 13 tested isolates in this study.
Using the following equation [35] :
Where Oac is the count of codon c for the amino acid a, and ka is the number of synonymous codons in amino acid a family, RSCU values were calculated. An RSCU value of 1 indicates no codon usage bias as the observed frequency is equal to the expected frequency. RSCU values less than 1 indicate negative bias, and values of greater than 1 indicates positive bias.
Accordingly, RSCU values are divided into 3 ranges; values ≤ 0.6 indicates underrepresented codons, values between 0.6 and 1.6 indicates randomly used or biased codons, and values ≥ 1.6 indicates over-represented or preferred codons [25, [35] [36] [37] .
The effective number of codons (ENc) measures the bias of using a smaller subset of codons apart from the equal use of synonymous codons. Also, the ENc measures the codon usage imbalance among genes, where an amino acid is encoded by one codon in a gene would be biased and negatively correlated with the ENc value. The ENc value ranges from 20-61, with higher values indicating more codons being used for each amino acid, i.e less bias and vice
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the .
versa. This measures codon bias irrespective of gene length and can be an indicator of codon usage regarding mutational bias [38] . ENc was calculated using the following equations [39] :
Then, the ENc value is obtained by:
Where ni is the count of codon i in m amino acid family and m is the number of codons in an amino acid family.
To verify the relationship between ENc and GC3s, ENc-plot was drawn where the expected ENc values from GC3s (denoted by `S') were determined according to the following equation [38, 40] :
Using the above equation, the expected fitting curve of ENc values was drawn then ENc values versus GC3s values for each coding region are plotted. If the distribution of the plotted genes is along/near the curve, then the codon usage bias is assumed to be affected only by mutation. If the distribution of the plotted genes is below the curve, then the codon usage bias is assumed to be affected by selection and other factors [41] .
Neutrality plot is used to estimate the effect of mutation pressure and natural selection on codon usage bias. In this study, the GC contents at the first, second and third codon positions (GC1, GC2, GC3, respectively) of the 13 SARS-CoV-2 isolates were analyzed. Then, GC12
representing the average GC content at the first and second codon positions of each isolate was obtained. Both GC12 and GC3 values were used for neutrality plot analysis. If the correlation between GC12 and GC3 is statistically significant and the slope of the regression The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.019463 doi: bioRxiv preprint line is close to 1, mutation pressure is assumed to be the main force structuring codon usage bias. Conversely, natural selection would have higher odds leading to a narrow distribution of GC content and a lack of correlation between GC12 and GC3 [42] [43] [44] .
Codon adaptation index (CAI) uses a reference set of highly expressed genes (e.g. ribosomal genes), this measure is an indicator of gene expression levels and natural selection; it ranges from 0 to 1 with higher values indicating stronger bias with respect to the reference set, therefore this method is an indicator of selection for a bias toward translational efficiency [35, 45] . Codon adaptation index (CAI) was calculated by the equation given by [45, 46] :
Where L is the count of codons in the gene and wc(k) is the relative adaptiveness value for the k-th codon in the gene. Twelve genes with the highest level of expression in the lung tissues for human were collected from the human protein atlas project database (Supplementary file 4) (https://www.proteinatlas.org/humanproteome/tissue/lung). Then, CAI values for the 13 isolates were calculated based on those 12 genes as a reference set.
A dendrogram was constructed using 13 complete genomic sequences of 13 SARS-CoV-2
isolates obtained from different geo-locations (Countries). Evolutionary relationships were inferred by using maximum-likelihood statistical method with general time-reversible (GTR) model implemented in MEGA-X software (v10.1) [47] . The bootstrap method with 1000
replicates was used to test the reliability of the phylogenetic tree. For each isolate, the following data are given: Species and country of origin.
Spearman's rank correlation and linear regression analyses tests were performed using R Language [48] . Different R packages as vhcub, SeqinR, ggplot2 and stats [49] [50] [51] [52] were used to calculate various CUB indices and to draw the graphs in this study. As well as a python package named CAI [46] was used to estimate the CAI for the tested viral isolates. A cluster analysis (Heat map) was performed using CIMminer (https://discover.nci.nih.gov/cimminer/)
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.019463 doi: bioRxiv preprint based on the RSCU values obtained from the tested isolates. Multiple sequence alignments for the whole genome of the 13 SARS-CoV-2 was done with MAFFT software (v7.450) and the phylogenetic analysis was performed with MEGA-X software (v10.1).
The analysis of nucleotide content in the 13 tested SARS-CoV-2 isolates showed AT bias in all codon positions. According to Fig. 1 : (i) The average GC and AT overall content was 38% to 62% respectively, (ii) For GC1, 2, and 3, their average percentages were 45%, 36% and 32% respectively, (iii) The values of AT1, AT2, and AT3 were 55%, 64%, and 68%, respectively. Synonymous Dinucleotide Usage (SDU) was employed to account for the dinucleotide usage in positions 2 and 3 in codons to reveal under-and over-represented dinucleotides. The average SDU values for each dinucleotide from all the examined isolates reported by bar plot (Fig. 2 ) and the red line signifies the cut off (SDU >1) of a dinucleotide to be over-represented. Seven dinucleotides had SDU values more than 1, in descending order (CpU, UpU, ApA, CpA, GpU, GpA, and ApU), all of these dinucleotides either contain A, U or both, reflecting A/U bias. Interestingly, CpG had an SDU value of less than 1 and ranked as the last dinucleotide out of the total 16 (Supplementary file 2).
A recent study [29] on N genes among 13 different coronaviruses (CoVs) reported that a higher AU% over GC% was observed in all the 13 coronaviruses. In this study, the nucleotide composition analysis showed the same pattern of AU%, in which it is overrepresented in all codon positions (AU1, AU2, and AU3), as well as the overall AU% ( can lead to a decrease in replication rate and subsequent viral attenuation, also causing a more powerful immune response while decreasing their abundance has the reverse effect [29, [53] [54] [55] . In HIV-1, the decrease in CpG was explained due to the host-driven force which selects against viruses rich in CpG dinucleotides and drives the observed under-representation [56] .
SARS-CoV-2 exhibited the same pattern of nucleotide and dinucleotide compositions as the . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.019463 doi: bioRxiv preprint aforementioned RNA viruses, which may be explained by the host-driven force that selects against CpG during the immune response against the virus.
In order to determine to what extent A/U ended codons are preferred, and the patterns of The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.019463 doi: bioRxiv preprint evolutionary relatedness of the 13 SARS-CoV-2 isolates based on their whole-genome sequence similarities, their pattern of codon usage bias may differ slightly.
In theory, ENc correlates negatively with CUB. For all isolates, the CDS average ENc value was around 48.54 with SD = 0.5 (Supplementary file 3) , except for SARS-CoV-2-Pakistan the average ENc was equal to 46.63. As well as, within the genes for each isolate, ENc values ranged from 39.94 to 55.89 (Supplementary files 3) , showing a wide range of ENc (CUB).
Using equation (5), an expected curve represent CUB dominated by the mutational force was drawn and the ENc-GC3 values plotted for all CDS for each isolate (Fig. 5) . The CDS of all isolates were found under the expected values of the standard curve, also, it is worth to mention that as the GC3 increases the CDS gets closer to the curve. Our results suggest that, mutational pressure is not the key factor in structuring the codon usage bias in all 13 SARS-CoV-2 isolates, but other factors are more likely involved, such as natural selection.
A previous study [57] [61, 62] .
The neutrality plot (Fig. 6) The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.019463 doi: bioRxiv preprint results suggest that, the relative neutrality (mutation pressure) had the minor effect (5.59% and 18.35%) on codon usage bias across all 13 isolates, and the main evolutionary force driving codon usage bias is the relative constraints on GC3 (natural selection) (94.41% and 81.65%).
In order to determine the degree of adaptation between the human lung tissues (Reservoir of viral host cells) and SARS-CoV-2 codon usage, the CAI values for each isolate was estimated using the most expressed genes in lung tissues as a reference set. Our results showed that, CAI values ( Table 1 ) ranged from 0.53 (Pakistan isolate) to 0.54 (Taiwan isolate). As well as, some genes showed a higher CAI with an average of 0.62 (nucleocapsid phosphoprotein gene) and ORF7a protein gene displayed a CAI value of 0.58. The CAI results for SARS-CoV-2 isolates revealed a moderate host-virus co-adaptation, also the CDS for the SARS-CoV-2 can utilize the human cell resources for its translation process efficiently. Moreover, the highest CAI value was recorded for nucleocapsid phosphoprotein gene (0.62) which plays a fundamental role during viral self-assembly [63] . The second highest gene with CAI 0.58 was ORF7a, which may play a role in viral assembly or budding events unique to SARS-CoV [64] . The CAI results for both genes reflect their importance (viral assembly and budding events) for the SARS-CoV-2 virus to complete its life-cycle efficiently in the host cell. Only small amounts of the Envelope (E) protein is sufficient to trigger the formation of virus-like particles [63] , which may explain its lowest CAI value (0.48) among other genes.
This study conclusively demonstrates that genome-wide codon usage bias in SARS-CoV-2 coding sequences are similar to what was found in most studied RNA viruses. However, mutation pressure is not the main force acting to shape the CUB in SARS-CoV-2, in contrast to what was observed in other RNA viruses (e.g. Hepatitis A virus and Influenza A virus). The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.019463 doi: bioRxiv preprint either A or U end nucleotides with the absence of G and C ones. Furthermore, some genes such as Nucleocapsid phosphoprotein, ORF7a protein, and Surface glycoprotein had slightly high CAI values which may indicate for selection force acting on their codon usage, as they play important roles in viral assembly and may help viruses avoid the host immune system.
Overall, there was no significant differences in the patterns of codon usage bias between the tested 13 SARS-CoV-2 isolates from different geo-locations, except for the isolate from Pakistan that might be slightly different, reflecting small evolutionary changes between them.
The findings of the present study may help in understanding the underlying factors involved in the evolution of SARS-CoV-2 viruses and the interactions with their host. Also, it may aid in vaccine design strategies.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.019463 doi: bioRxiv preprint Table 1: The table shows the average ENc and CAI values for the 13 SARS-CoV-2 isolates.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.019463 doi: bioRxiv preprint Table2: RSCU values for all the 13 isolates in each country, and the RSCU > 1.6 are marked. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . Figure 3 . Cluster analysis (Heat map) of RSCU values in 13 SARS-CoV-2 isolates coding regions. The heat map represents the RSCU values divided into 3 ranges; <1 (Green color), 1-1.6 (Dark red), and >1.6 (Distinct red). Euclidean distance and complete-linkage methods were used to produce the clusters.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . Figure 4 . Phylogenetic analysis of 13 SARS-CoV-2 isolates based on their whole genome sequence. The rooted phylogenetic tree was constructed by the maximum-likelihood method with General time-reversible model (GTR), and bootstrap method with 1000 replicates to test the reliability of the phylogenetic tree. The complete genome sequence of (Human betacoronavirus 2c EMC/2012) was used as an out group.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.019463 doi: bioRxiv preprint The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.019463 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 6 . Neutrality plot analysis of 13 SARS-CoV-2 isolates from different countries. GC12 frequencies were plotted against GC3 frequencies. The y-axis (GC12) refers to the average GC frequency at the first and second codon positions. The x-axis (GC3) refers to the GC frequency at the third codon position. The slope value indicates the mutational pressure.
Grant information: The author(s) declared that no grants were involved in supporting this work.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.019463 doi: bioRxiv preprint
