The COVID-19 pandemic has led to widespread shortages of personal protective equipment (PPE) for healthcare workers, including filtering facepiece respirators (FFRs) such as N95 masks. These masks are normally intended for single use, but their sterilization and subsequent reuse could substantially mitigate a world-wide shortage. In this study, we investigate PPE sterilization using ionized hydrogen peroxide (iHP), generated by SteraMist ® equipment (TOMI; Frederick, MD), in a sealed environment chamber installed in the animal facility of an academic medical center. Following one to five sterilization cycles, five N95 mask models from three manufacturers were evaluated using three criteria: efficiency of iHP in sterilization (measured with bacterial spores in standard biological indicator assemblies), ability of sterilized masks to efficiently filter particles down to 0.3µm, and a quantitative fit test. Filtration efficiency was measured using ambient particulate matter at a university lab and an aerosolized NaCl challenge at a National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) pre-certification laboratory. The data demonstrate that N95 masks sterilized using SteraMist iHP technology retain function up to five cycles, the maximum number tested. Some but not all PPE could also be sterilized in the same manner, and pre-treatment with a handheld iHP generator was required for semi-enclosed surfaces such as respirator hoses. A typical environment chamber with a volume of ~80 m 3 can treat ~7000 masks per day, and as well as other items of PPE, making this an effective approach for a busy medical center.
The COVID-19 pandemic has led to widespread shortages in personal protective equipment (PPE) for clinicians and first responders. Shortages in filtering facepiece respirators (FFRs) such as N95 "masks", which are certified to filter 95% of airborne particles down to 0.3 µm, are particularly problematic because these normally single-use items are a mainstay of infection control. It has been widely reported that the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) anticipates a need for as many as 3.5 x 10 9 N95 masks 1 in 2020 for US use alone, but estimates of total available supply are far short of that number 2 . The consequent need for N95 mask sterilization and subsequent reuse is therefore likely to continue for the foreseeable future.
The possibility that disposable N95 masks could be sterilized and reused was raised 15 years ago as a strategy to address shortages arising from medical emergencies, [3] [4] [5] but with the exception of a single FDA-funded study by the Battelle Memorial Institute, 6 little subsequent research was performed on the topic. Recently, in response to acute N95 mask shortages, multiple strategies for mask sterilization have been proposed and studied, including exposure to ultraviolet (UV) germicidal irradiation, vaporized hydrogen peroxide, moist heat, ethylene oxide, and gamma irradiation [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] . In this study, we evaluate a recently developed technology, ionized hydrogen peroxide (iHP), as a method for sterilizating N95 masks and other PPE.
Hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) is a powerful sterilizing agent that can be used on porous and other surfaces following vaporization or ionization to create a mist containing hydroxyl radicals. Such vaporized or ionized hydrogen peroxide methods (VHP/iHP) are widely used for environmental sterilization across multiple industries including food preparation, healthcare, and life sciences [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] . VHP/iHP methods can be used on a wider range of sensitive materials than high temperature methods (e.g. autoclaving) and are safer than ethylene oxide methods. Four distinct VHP/iHP-based H 2 O 2 sterilization technologies that have been commercialized to date are shown in Table 1 , each of which involves a different approach to generating and delivering the sterilant. In all cases microbial killing is achieved through the reaction of hydroxyl radicals with proteins, nucleic acids and other biomolecules in pathogens.
Three VHP-based systems have received emergency use authorization (EUA) from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for N95 mask decontamination 20 , even though relatively limited peer-reviewed data is available 8 , particularly from non-commercial third parties. As a consequence, it is difficult for infection control teams in hospitals and other healthcare providers to evaluate these systems. The absence of data on the post-sterilization performance of different makes and models of N95 masks is also limiting. The Brigham and Women's Hospital (BWH; Boston MA) Incident Command, which is involved in this study, currently has on hand over 30 models of N95 masks from three manufacturers. The topic of this study. Currently being investigated for sterilization of PPE for re-use in academic medical centers . CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 19.20069997 doi: medRxiv preprint This study focuses on the use of iHP TM as an N95 mask sterilization method, specifically the SteraMist Binary Ionization Technology ® (BIT) from TOMI (Beverly Hills, CA). iHP was registered with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in 2015 for use in health care, life sciences, food safety, and other settings (appearing on EPA lists G, H, K, L, and M). Most recently it was added to EPA List N: Disinfectants for Use Against SARS-CoV-2, for use on hard, nonporous surfaces 25 . The active ingredient in iHP is 7.8% aqueous H 2 O 2 (an H 2 O 2 concentration 5 times lower than used with commercial VHP systems), which is flowed past a plasma arc and dispersed into a treatment chamber as a mist of micronsized liquid droplets. As it passes through the plasma, the hydrogen peroxide is ionized into reactive hydroxyl radicals, the active sterilant. iHP is commercially available in two implementations: a handheld sprayer device ("Surface Unit") and an environmental unit ("Environment System"). The environment systems used for this study were installed at the Dana Farber Cancer Institute (DFCI; Boston, MA) animal research facility for use in sterilizing incoming equipment and materials.
Following cycles of sterilization, masks were tested for three critical features: (1) sterility, as measured by the inactivation of bacterial spores contained in biological indicators; (2) filtration efficiency, measured both by aerosolized 75 nm NaCl particles and by 0.3-1 µm ambient particulate matter; and (3) fit, using a PortaCount quantitative fit test apparatus. Multiple sterilization cycles were completed to assess mask durability. Sterilization of other PPE items such as face shields and hoods and hoses for Powered-Air Purifying Respirators (PAPRs) was also explored. Testing was performed at the DFCI, MIT and ICS Laboratories (a commercial laboratory accredited to perform testing to NIOSH/ISO/IEC standards). Figure 1) , an iPad (Apple, Cupertino CA), and an iPad case. The iPad was included for testing since BWH is making them available to COVID-19 patients as a means of communicating with family members.
A first set of 26 N95 masks representing five different models was processed using the SteraMist system for zero to five cycles, and then analyzed for single-pass filtration efficiency using ambient particulate matter at MIT. A second set of 22 N95 masks was processed using the SteraMist system and sent to ICS Laboratories (Brunswick, OH) for testing to NIOSH/ISO/IEC standards. Four masks underwent a quantitative fit test at DFCI following sterilization.
Sterilization of N95 masks and other PPE was accomplished using a SteraMist-equipped room (dimensions 5.64 m x 4.57 m x 3.05 m) at the DFCI animal research facility. Three SteraMist environmental units (room version TPO-302-PLC-V1.4) are mounted on the ceiling of the room and can be controlled via a single panel, accessible from the outside. iHP mist was delivered through three nozzles at a total of 90 mL/min for 15 min, yielding a delivered concentration of 17.7 mL/m 3 .
N95 masks were placed with their interior surface facing up on standard stainless-steel shelves (open grid, InterMetro style). Most of the other PPE was also laid out on these shelves with the exception of two PAPR hoods, one PAPR hose, and the Tyvek coverall, which were hung . CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 19.20069997 doi: medRxiv preprint in various configurations (Figure 1) . PPE was spaced 6 cm to 20 cm apart on each shelf; this was designed to test sterilization performance at multiple points in the room but we presume that tighter spacing could be used in other settings. Two PAPR hoods, one PAPR hose, and one face shield were pre-treated with a SteraMist handheld spraying device in advance of processing in the SteraMist-equipped chamber. Pre-treatment was intended to ensure delivery of sterilant to items with semi-enclosed surfaces (such as the inside of a PAPR hose). Treating with the handheld device consisted of spraying the equipment from a distance of approximately 0.5-1m for a few seconds per surface. Per manufacturer protocol, the 100-minute sterilization cycle in the environmental chamber included: an initial 15minute fill phase during which the mist was released; a 20minute dwell phase to allow the mist to penetrate the room; and a 65-minute scrub phase during which the exhaust was re-opened to aerate the space at a rate of 43 air changes per hour. The room is tested quarterly to ensure homogeneous sterilization throughout the space.
The efficiency of sterilization was evaluated using Apex Biological Indicators (BIs: Mesa Labs; Boseman, MT); bacterial spores in these indicators are more resistant to killing than most viruses and therefore provide a conservative and simple estimate of sterilization efficiency.
In particular, the Geobacillus stearothermophilus spores used in this study are known to be difficult to kill using hydrogen peroxide 6 . Each Apex biological indicator ribbon carries a minimum of 1.0 x 10 6 G. stearothermophilus spores. The BIs were positioned prior to the first sterilization cycle. For the N95 masks, the BIs were placed under or adjacent to the masks. For the PAPR components and other equipment, BIs were placed on surfaces that were judged to be least accessible to the sterilant (for example, inside the PAPR tubing) ( Table 3) . The BIs were extracted using sterile forceps, placed in Releasat growth medium (Mesa Labs), incubated at 55-60°C, and monitored for bacterial growth using a colorimetric assay over a period of 10 days 27 . Previous work with G. stearothermophilus spores suggests that a conservative benchmark for complete sterilization represents a 6-log 10 kill; that is, a ratio in the number of surviving to initial viable spores in a BI of 10 -6 (Ref 28 ). This corresponds to no observable bacterial growth and thus no color change after 5 days in Releasat medium.
Single-pass filtration efficiency testing was performed at MIT on four control N95 masks and 22 masks sterilized in the SteraMist-equipped chamber. An 8cm x 8cm sample of each N95 mask was inserted into a specialized air duct (Supplementary Figure 2) , and ambient particulate matter was driven through the duct, and thus through the mask fabric, using a pressure differential of ~175 pascals at 0.4 m/s face velocity. The concentration of 0.3, 0.5, and 1 μm diameter particles prior to and after passage through the mask fabric was determined using an Aerotrak 9306 optical particle counter (TSI Inc.; Shoreview, MN) ( Table  2) . Although readily available and potentially effective, this testing method is not equivalent to the NIOSHapproved testing technique for N95 masks and thus, these results should be interpreted as a relative, not absolute, measurements of filtration efficiency.
The second sample of sterilized N95 masks was tested for instantaneous filter efficiency at ICS labs to NIOSH standards. Per NIOSH testing Procedure No. TEB-APR-STP-0059 (rev. 3.2) 29 , masks were challenged with a sodium chloride aerosol neutralized to a Boltzmann equilibrium state at 25 ± 5 °C and a relative humidity of 30 ± 10%. Particle size and distribution was verified to correspond to a median diameter of 0.075 ± 0.020 µm, with a geometric standard deviation ≤ 1.86. N95 masks were conditioned at 85 ± 5% relative humidity and 38 ± 2 °C for 25 hours prior to filter efficiency testing. Each mask was then assembled into a fixture and subjected to instantaneous aerosol loading. The loading was performed by depositing sodium chloride aerosol at an airflow rate of 85 liters per minute (LPM) for one minute.
Four masks underwent a quantitative fit test following sterilization to confirm that sterilization did not interfere with the ability of masks to form an effective seal with the human face. Testing was performed using a PortaCount Pro+ 8038 fit tester (TSI Inc.; Shoreview, MN) set to the 100-200 fit factor range, per manufacturer recommendation.
Ambient particulate matter filtration data for 3M 1860 masks over five SteraMist sterilization cycles. Each mask was tested in a university laboratory for filtration efficiency at three particle sizes (0.3, 0.5 and 1.0 µm). Two masks were tested at two cycles and showed similar filtration efficiency; one mask is shown here.
. CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. 
All BIs placed under or adjacent to N95 masks that had been exposed to a single sterilization cycle in the SteraMist-equipped chamber exhibited at least a 9-log 10 kill (representing no color change following seven days of incubation in Releasat medium). BIs placed within PAPR hoods also achieved 9-log 10 kill as did a BI placed in a PAPR hose that was pre-treated using a SteraMist handheld spraying device (Supplementary Table 1) . BIs placed on the iPad, iPad case, and PanFab face shield Table 2 : Results obtained at a university laboratory on singlepass filtration efficiency for ambient particle matter. Each row represents a single N95 mask. designs 26 all passed the sterilization threshold, and the iPad was observed to be fully functional after one cycle of iHP treatment. In contrast, two BIs placed inside either end of a PAPR hose that was not subjected to pre-treatment were not sterilized, as determined by rapid bacterial growth following transfer to Releasat medium. This was also true of a BI embedded in the thick foam at the top of a Fisherbrand Disposable Face Shield. We tested the effect of pretreating the same face shield with a hand-held SteraMist device (after inserting a new BI) and observed a 4-log 10 kill, which also fails the 6-log 10 threshold conventionally used to score successful sterilization.
From these data we conclude that a single iHP cycle is efficient at sterilizing N95 masks and other equipment placed throughout a SteraMist-equipped decontamination chamber and that the process is not obviously damaging to delicate equipment such as an iPad (n = 1). Penetration into semi-enclosed spaces such as PAPR hoses appeared to be less efficient but such equipment could be sterilized by pre-treatment with a handheld iHP-delivery device followed by a cycle of iHP treatment in a chamber. Even with pre-treatment sterility was not achieved with thick face shield foam, suggesting that such normally disposable PPE should not be reused. In contrast, a custom-fabricated face shield 26 introduced under an existing FDA EUA and consisting of 3D printed parts appeared to be sterilized effectively.
Performance data was collected at MIT on five models of N95 masks from three manufacturers (a total of 26 units) using an ambient particulate matter filtration efficiency test. Relative to control N95 masks, we observed no reduction in filtration efficiency for 0.3 0.5, and 1 µm particles by N95 masks subjected to up to five sterilization cycles ( Table 2) . Data on pressure, temperature, air face velocity, and relative humidity during testing are found in Supplementary Table 2. Figure 2 shows typical results for 3M 1860 masks through five sterilization cycles and a control mask that was not sterilized; data were obtained across three different particle sizes for 7 masks total: two masks at two cycles and one mask at zero, one, three, four and five cycles respectively.
Four models of N95 masks from three manufacturers (23 units total) were evaluated using NIOSH-approved testing procedures at ICS Laboratories. The data showed that all N95 masks, subjected to a maximum of five sterilization cycles, retained a filtration efficiency of ≥95%, passing the NIOSH test threshold ( Table 3, Supplementary Table  3) . Among the N95 masks tested, filtration for 75nm NaCl particles was least effective for the Gerson 2130 N95 masks, but even these units passed the certification threshold following two sterilization cycles, which was the maximum number of cycles tested by ICS for this model. These findings suggest that the filtration efficiency of several models of N95 masks was not substantially affected by one to five sterilization cycles and that sterilized N95 mask perform as required on an instantaneous filter efficiency test for certification to NIOSH standards. See discussion for other testing that is currently underway.
Cycles . CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. 
All four masks that were tested for fit (Halyard 46767, 3M 1860) using the PortaCount equipment passed a reading of >200 fit factor following 2 and 5 decontamination cycles. This corresponds to a filtration efficiency of 99% or higher (data not shown) according to manufacturer guidelines. Thus, iHP sterilization does not appear to impair the ability of N95 masks to form an effective seal against a user's face.
Hydrogen peroxide has a long history of successful use in the field of medical device sterilization, and our results support the use of the iHP as a PPE sterilant when delivered using a SteraMist-equipped environment chamber, in some cases complemented by pre-treatment with a handheld iHP delivery device. This extends to PPE such as N95 masks that are usually disposed after a single use. The DFCI SteraMist environment chamber used in this study has a volume of ~80 m 3 and could comfortably fit ~ 2400 N95 masks per cycle without the masks touching each other, or a lesser number of PAPR hoods and other PPE. At this rate, assuming idealized staffing and logistics, roughly 4,800-7,200 masks could be sterilized for use per day given a typical 100 minute sterilization cycle. These numbers could be increased with the addition of an overnight workforce.
We note that in this study, in keeping with standard practice, sterility was judged using biological indicators containing bacterial spores and not based on killing of pathogens such as SARS-CoV-2 encountered in a clinical setting. However, the G. stearothermophilus spores in the BIs used in this study are known to be resistant to killing by hydrogen peroxide, and generally spores are substantially more resistant to sterilization than enveloped viruses such as SARS-CoV-2 30 . Recent work has also demonstrated that VHP can kill SARS-CoV-2. 31 Thus, we do not believe our use of BIs rather than assays for virus load represents a significant limitation in the interpretation of the data.
Two independent lines of evidence, one generated at a university laboratory and one at a commercial laboratory accredited to perform N95 mask certification to NIOSH/ISO/IEC standards, show that N95 masks decontaminated with iHP using SteraMist technology retain their performance with respect to filtration for up to five cycles. Quantitative fit testing on a limited number of sterilized N95 masks confirms that they still fit correctly. Thus, sterilized N95 masks remain fully functional.
Given the urgency of N95 mask shortages, we are reporting results obtained to date. However, multiple additional tests are currently underway to increase confidence in our specific findings and the practice of sterilizing and reusing N95 masks more generally. For example, while we report data on instantaneous filter efficiency testing on N95 masks, we are still awaiting results from ICS Labs on fully loaded filtration testing (a required component of N95 testing to NIOSH standards). Quantitative fit testing for other N95 mask models is also ongoing, as is filtration efficiency testing on decontaminated masks stored for 10 days after treatment; this is intended to test for time-dependent degradation in N95 mask performance following sterilization.
The tests described in this study were conducted using unused N95 masks. We do not yet have data on N95 masks used in an actual health care facility responding to a Table 3 : Results from ICS Laboratories on filtration efficiency according to NIOSH standard Procedure No. TEB-APR-STP-0059. Each row represents data from 1-5 N95 masks and data are reported as the average for all tests that were performed. is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 19.20069997 doi: medRxiv preprint pandemic. Among questions to be addressed by real-world testing are breathing resistance for an N95 mask that has been loaded with internal and external contaminants; the comfort level of health care workers in using an N95 mask that is sterilized but previously used by another individual; and the rate of wastage arising from breakage of elastic bands, contamination with makeup or topical face products, and unacceptable degradation in fit. Remarkably, these types of real-world use data are not available for any iHP/VHP-based sterilization method, even for technologies that have been heavily promoted commercially. Nonetheless, the data reported in this study were judged by our clinical teams to be sufficient to implement N95 mask sterilization and reuse at DFCI.
Future work should address the question of whether decontaminated N95 masks must be returned to the original users (as specified in the Sterrad and Sterris EUAs for N95 mask decontamination) or can be returned to a common pool (as specified in the Batelle EUA); the latter is substantially easier to implement from a logistical perspective. Finally, while there is good support for the use of spore-based BIs in measuring the efficiency of sterilization, direct tests on SARS-CoV-2 itself may be warranted, particularly in the case of items such as hoses and other PPE that have a complex shape (this would require BL3-level studies).
Our data support the use of the SteraMist iHP technology as a sterilization method for reuse of N95 masks, including many of the most commonly used models, as well as other types of PPE -in some cases following pre-treatment with an iHP handheld delivery device. In interpreting these data, it is important to note that not all iHP/VHP methods are the same. While Bioquell is approved under an FDA EUA for 20 cycles, N95 masks sterilized using an alternative HPGP method commercialized by Sterrad fail at five cycles (the Sterrad EUA was approved for 2 sterilization cycles and requires that a mask be returned to a single user). 8, 23 Moreover, our data show that semienclosed items of PPE, such as PAPR hoses, cannot be sterilized without pre-treatment, and that face shields with thick foam may not be sterile even after iHP pre-treatment followed by iHP treatment in an environmental chamber. Thus, it is imperative that institutions seeking to deploy iHP/VHP technology review available primary data prior to local deployment. We also suggest that BIs routinely be deployed when attempting to sterilize hoses and other semi-enclosed PE components.
The issues described above about sterilization of N95 masks have been recognized for over two decades based on multiple instances of human transmission of novel respiratory diseases. Despite all of these warnings, the first few months of the global COVID-19 pandemic have demonstrated how ineffective our preparation has been. We hope that the study of sterilization technologies such as iHP/VHP will continue and involve peer-review of independently acquired data so that we are in a better position for the coming waves of this crisis and for those in the future.
Local citizens and engineers have generously donated their time and resources to PanFab and they are essential to program success. This work was supported by the Harvard-MIT Center for Regulatory Science and by NIH/NCI grants P30-CA006516, U54-CA225088 (to PKS, NL and DP) and by T32-GM007753 (to DP) and by the Harvard Ludwig Center. AKC is supported by the Hugh Hampton Young Fellowship of MIT.
PKS is a member of the SAB or Board of Directors of Applied Biomath, Glencoe Software and RareCyte Inc and has equity in these companies. In the last five years the Sorger lab has received research funding from Novartis and Merck. Sorger declares that none of these relationships are directly or indirectly related to the content of this manuscript. NRB is a consultant for or has received honoraria from the following companies: Seattle Genetics, Sanofi, and Bayer. The authors have no affiliation with and received no compensation from TOMI Environmental Solutions, Inc and TOMI played no role in the design of the study. The authors corresponded with members of TOMI Corporation concerning the technical specifications of the SteraMist system. . CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. Figure 1 : Illustrative photograph of handheld device processing before sterilization by environmental SteraMist system, on a DuPont Tyvek ® 400 coverall. Figure 2 : Image of ambient particulate matter air ducts used in MIT testing of N95 masks. Note that this is a destructive test in which the N95 mask is cut prior to introduction into the testing chamber.
. CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. . CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. . CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 19.20069997 doi: medRxiv preprint 
