We have analyzed the cell-type-specific expression of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) components across 141 cell types or subtypes as defined by single-cell RNA-seq (scRNAseq) analysis. ACE2, one of the components of RAS, also facilitates SARS-CoV-2 entry into cells in cooperation with its associated protease TMPRSS2. Therefore, our analysis also contributes to the understanding of SARS-CoV-2 infection, spreading of the virus throughout the body, and potential viral interference with RAS in COVID-19 patients.
The COVID-19 pandemic caused by SARS coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has created a global health emergency with more than a million confirmed cases as of April 4, 2020 1 . For cellular entry, SARS-CoV-2 relies on the interaction of its glycosylated viral spike (S) protein with the host membrane-bound aminopeptidase angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). Subsequently, transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) cleaves S and/or ACE2 protein, which facilitates the fusion of viral and cellular membranes 2 . ACE2 is also a crucial component of RAS, which regulates several key physiological processes such as blood pressure and electrolyte balance and viral infection of ACE2-expressing cells may impair RAS function 3 .
The secreted and systemically distributed protease renin (REN) activates RAS by proteolytically cleaving plasma angiotensinogen (AGT) to produce the 10-amino-acid (aa) hormonal peptide, angiotensin I (Ang I). Subsequently, Ang I is processed to the 8-aa Ang II by the metallopeptidase angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) present on the surface of pulmonary and kidney endothelial cells. Ang II is the active peptide in RAS triggering vasoconstriction, sodium retention, and fibrosis and signals by binding to its receptor AGTR1 or AT1R. ACE2, a metallopeptidase paralogous to ACE, counters the activity of ACE by digesting Ang II to the 7 aa Ang-(1-7) form, thereby attenuating the effects of Ang II 3 . Ang-(1-7) signals through binding to the G-protein coupled receptor MAS1 as well as the receptor AGTR2 or AT2R. Activation of MAS1 protein is coupled with several downstream pathways including activation of phospholipase A2 author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
PLA2G4A, release of arachidonic acid, calcium-independent activation of nitric oxide synthase, activation of PI3K/Akt, MAP kinases, RhoA, and cAMP/PKA 4 .
Since SARS-CoV-2 interfaces with the RAS system by potentially competing for ACE2, we reviewed and analyzed 14 distinct tissue scRNA-seq datasets to determine cell-type-and tissue-specific expression of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 as well as other essential RAS factors including ACE, AGTR1, AGTR2, and MAS1 using both publicly available and unpublished datasets from our laboratory. The datasets include adult 5 and fetal lung 6 , colon 7 , ileum 7 , esophagus 5 , rectum 7 , spleen 5 , fetal heart 8 , healthy and allograft kidney (data not published), skin 9 , first-trimester placenta and decidua 10 , and testis (data not published). In addition, we also analyzed bulk RNA-seq data of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from the first reported COVID-19 patient from Wuhan termed as 'Wuhan BALF' with no history of hepatitis, tuberculosis, or diabetes 11 , and normal human bronchial epithelial (NHBE) cells 12 , often used for studying coronavirus infection.
Based on published cell type assignment or by in-house generation of expression matrices using raw scRNA-seq datasets, we defined gene expression for 141 cell types including cell subtypes (Fig. 1 ). Epithelial cells across these different tissues showed the highest expression for the host factors ACE2 and TMPRSS2 required for viral entry 2 . In adult lung, alveolar type 1 and 2, as well as ciliated epithelial cells co-expressed ACE2 and TMPRSS2 with highest expression in alveolar type 2 cells. In the kidney, we found that proximal tubular cells and tubular progenitor cells co-expressed ACE2 and TMPRSS2. In the gastrointestinal tract, epithelial cells of the esophagus, rectum, colon, and ileum also co-expressed ACE2 and TMPRSS2. Furthermore, lung epithelial cell types additionally co-expressed ACE, AGTR1, and AGTR2, whereas kidney proximal tubular cells co-expressed ACE and AGTR1, but not AGTR2. Enterocytes of the gastrointestinal tract co-expressed ACE but only minimally either of AGTR1 or AGTR2. RAS is considered largely a 'blood-borne hormonal' system with endothelial cells being the major responders and this hypothesis is supported by the co-expression of ACE and AGTR1 in vascular author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.11.034603 doi: bioRxiv preprint endothelial cells in all tissues. However, AGTR2 expression was restricted to the vascular endothelial cells of lungs and fetal heart. ACE2, in contrast, was nearly absent from vascular endothelial cells of all adult tissues. The expression of the receptor MAS1 was tissue-specifically restricted to adult lung, esophagus, and epithelial progenitor cells of the gastrointestinal tract, but was absent from kidney.
RAS undergoes major changes in response to pregnancy with the uteroplacental unit playing a crucial role in the signaling cascade 13 infection. Acute kidney injury (AKI) has been noted in a small but significant proportion of patients with COVID-19 disease and is an independent risk factor for in-hospital mortality 16 . Histopathology author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.11.034603 doi: bioRxiv preprint of kidney tissue obtained at autopsy in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection showed severe acute tubular necrosis with lymphocytic infiltration and the presence of viral nucleocapsid proteins 17 patients [21] [22] [23] [24] . The detection of blood-circulating virus may be technically challenging, either because of its low titer in blood or because of recovering intact extracellular RNA from nucleaserich biofluids 21 .
In summary, the unique cell-type specificity of RAS components revealed by scRNA-seq challenges certain aspects of the current paradigm of RAS 22 author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.11.034603 doi: bioRxiv preprint
Source of scRNA-seq datasets and the downstream analysis. The first step in the analysis was to generate averaged expression profiles for the individual cell types using scRNA-seq datasets. For this purpose, the metadata containing cell type assignments to the barcodes and the raw UMI (unique molecular barcodes) count matrices were obtained for various tissues: ileum, colon, and rectum 7 , and fetal lung 6 . For other tissues such as adult lung, esophagus, and spleen published R object containing metadata and raw counts were obtained 5 . We recently published fetal heart 8 , skin 9 , and first-trimester placenta and decidua 10 scRNA-seq data and it was used for generating averaged expression profiles for cell types. Next, we used in-house generated and unpublished scRNA-seq data from tissues of donor and allograft kidney, and testis. After averaged expression profiles for cell types were generated, the expression was normalized to a million to generate transcript per million (TPM) values, followed by transformation to log2(TPM+1) for representing the gene expression in Fig. 1. author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.11.034603 doi: bioRxiv preprint
