To examine the impact of providing healthcare during or after health emergencies caused by viral epidemic outbreaks on healthcare workers´(HCWs) mental health, and to assess the available evidence base regarding interventions to reduce such impact.
Design: Systematic rapid review and meta-analysis.
Data sources: MEDLINE, Embase, and PsycINFO, searched up to 23 March 2020.
We selected observational and experimental studies examining the impact on mental health of epidemic outbreaks on HCWs. One reviewer screened titles and abstracts, and two reviewers independently reviewed full texts. We extracted study characteristics, symptoms, prevalence of mental health problems, risk factors, mental health interventions, and its impact. We assessed risk of bias for each individual study and used GRADE to ascertain the certainty of the evidence. We conducted a narrative and tabulated synthesis of the results. We pooled data using random-effects meta-analyses to estimate the prevalence of specific mental health problems.
We included 61 studies (56 examining impact on mental health and five about interventions to reduce such impact). Most were conducted in Asia (59%), in the hospital setting (79%), and examined the impact of the SARS epidemic (69%). The pooled prevalence was higher for anxiety (45%, 95% CI 21 to 69%; 6 studies, 3,373 participants), followed by depression (38%, 95% CI 15 to 60%; 7 studies, 3,636 participants), acute stress disorder (31%, 95% CI 0 to 82%, 3 studies , 2,587 participants), burnout (29%, 95% CI 25 to 32%; 3 studies; 1,168 participants), and post-traumatic stress disorder (19%, 95% CI 11 to 26%, 10 studies, 3,121 participants). Based on 37 studies, we identified factors associated with the likelihood of developing those problems, including sociodemographic (younger age and female gender), social (lack of social support, social rejection or isolation, stigmatization), and occupational (working in a high risk environment (frontline staff), specific occupational roles (e.g., nurse), and lower levels of specialised training, preparedness and job experience) factors. Five studies reported interventions for frontline HCW, two of which were educational and aimed to prevent mental health problems by increasing HCWs´ resilience. These interventions increased confidence in support and training, pandemic self-efficacy, and interpersonal problems solving (very low certainty). One multifaceted intervention implemented training and organisational changes) targeted at hospital nurses during the SARS epidemic, reporting improvements in . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
(which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint .
Word count: 3,511 
Infectious disease outbreaks are relatively common, 1 often prompting an international response involving thousands of healthcare workers (HCWs). 2 Providing frontline healthcare during infectious outbreaks increases the risk of HCWs developing mental health problems, both short and long-term. 3 It has been suggested that specific occupational factors are associated with psychological outcomes of HCWs during an infectious disease outbreak. 2 Working in a high-risk environment, adhering to quarantine, job-related stress, and belonging to a specific cadre were all considered to aggravate psychological outcomes. Perceived safety, namely through access to protective equipment, and specialised training, mitigated those outcomes. 2 During December 2019 a new infectious disease outbreak was reported in Wuhan, Hubei province, China, 4 which was named COVID-19. 5 The World Health Organization (WHO) declared COVID-19 a pandemic by March 11th 2020, and by 30 March 2020 it had spread to most countries and territories, with more than 693,000 known cases and a death toll of over 33,000 people. 6 Early anecdotal evidence from Wuhan showed how this unprecedented situation impacted the mental health of frontline HCWs, who reported mental problems such as anxiety, depressive symptoms, anger, and fear. 7 These problems cannot only have a long-lasting effect on the mental health of HCWs, 3 but also hinder the urgent response to COVID-19, by jeopardising attention and decision-making. 7 Tackling the mental health of HCWs during this pandemic is essential, and will strengthen healthcare systems' capacity. 8 Previous systematic reviews have explored social and occupational factors associated with psychological outcomes in HCW during an infectious disease outbreak, 2 and their perceptions of risk and use of coping strategies towards emerging respiratory infectious diseases. 9 However, to date, the impact of viral disease outbreaks on specific mental health problems and the effectiveness of interventions to ameliorate such impact have not been systematically reported.
The aim of this rapid systematic literature review is twofold: i) to examine the impact of health emergencies caused by a viral pandemic or epidemic on HCWs mental health; and ii) to assess the effectiveness of interventions to reduce such impact.
We conducted a rapid systematic review following WHO guidelines 10 and Cochrane's recommendations for Rapid Reviews in response to COVID-19. 11 We followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines for planning, conducting and reporting this study. 12 
We designed specific search strategies for biomedical databases (MEDLINE/Ovid, EMBASE/Elsevier, and PsycInfo/EBSCO), combining MeSH terms and free-text keywords (Online Appendix 1). We searched databases from inception to 23rd March 2020, and checked the list of included studies of relevant systematic reviews. 9 13 14 We used EndNote X8™ to create a bibliographical database, and Rayyan to screen relevant records. 15 
We included empirical studies examining the impact on mental health of epidemic outbreaks on HCWs, and studies about interventions to reduce such impact. We included observational (cross-sectional, case-control, and cohort studies), and experimental studies (non-controlled before-after studies, controlled before-after studies, non-randomised controlled trials, and randomised controlled trials).
We included studies on any type of health emergency caused by a viral epidemic or pandemic, and examining its impact on HCWs mental health during or after the crisis. For intervention studies, we included also those that examined interventions to protect mental health of healthcare workers prior, during or after the outbreak onset. All types of settings and healthcare professionals were accepted for inclusion. We included studies measuring any type of mental health problem or psychiatric morbidity. We excluded narrative reviews, thesis, editorials, protocols, letters to the editor, and studies published in languages other than English, Spanish or Portuguese.
One reviewer (of IRC, MJSR, MAFR, RZC, DGB) screened the retrieved references at title and abstract against the selection criteria. Two reviewers (of those aforementioned) independently and blinded against the others' judgements assessed full-text eligibility. We solved disagreements by consensus or by involving a third reviewer, if needed.
We used structured forms to extract relevant data, such as country, health emergency, setting, population, epidemiological design, number of participants, mental health conditions, clinical outcomes and their measurement tools, and main study results. For observational studies addressing the impact of health emergencies on HCWs mental health, we extracted the prevalence rate of the mental conditions examined in terms of the number of professionals suffering the condition (numerator) out of the total number of study participants (denominator) . If available, we extracted information about the risk factors. For intervention studies (i.e., randomised and non-randomised trials), we extracted data about the characteristics of the intervention as well as that reported also for observational studies.
We assessed the risk of bias of observational studies (i.e., cross-sectional, case-control, and cohort studies) by using the set of tools developed by Evidence Partners (McMaster University) 16 ; whereas ROBINS I 17 was applied to uncontrolled trials, and AMSTAR 18 for systematic reviews.
One reviewer (of MJSR, MAFR, AC, DF, JM, GP, RZ) extracted all the data and assessed the risk of bias, while a second reviewer cross-checked the information for accuracy and completeness.
We conducted a narrative and tabulated synthesis of the results, classifying the studies according to the type of study (i.e., impact of infectious disease outbreaks on HCWs mental health, or interventions to reduce such impact), and timing (i.e., before, during, or after the outbreak). We adapted a taxonomy proposed in a previous study 14 to classify risk factors as social, occupational and sociodemographic.
For studies about the impact of outbreaks on mental health, we conducted random-effects meta-analyses to estimate the prevalence and 95% confidence interval (CI) of each type of mental health condition, using the STATA command "metaprop". We conducted subgroup analyses to explore potential differences in the prevalence of mental health disorders during vs. after the outbreak. Heterogeneity was quantified by the I 2 statistic, where I 2 >50% was deemed as substantial heterogeneity. 19 Publication bias was examined with funnel plots and presence of asymmetry tested with Begg 20 and Egger tests. 21 We used Stata, version 12.0 to conduct meta-analyses.
We used the GRADE approach 22 to assess the quality of evidence related to the outcomes included in this rapid review. We used GRADEpro 2011 23 software to create 'Summary of findings' tables. For assessments of the overall quality of evidence for each outcome that included pooled data, we downgraded the evidence from 'high quality' by one level for serious, or by two levels for very serious, study limitations (risk of bias), indirectness of evidence, inconsistency, imprecision of effect estimates, or potential publication bias. 22
We have invited HCW frontline to promote the dissemination of these results, alongside members of the author team who are also frontline HCWs.
The search resulted in a total of 2,317 records. After 143 duplicates were removed, 2,174 records remained to be screened. We excluded 2,042 records based on title and abstract screening. We assessed full-text 132 articles in full-text, of which we excluded 74. After including three additional studies identified from manual searches, sixty-one published studies met the inclusion criteria for this systematic rapid review. 13 Figure 1 illustrates the selection process of the included studies. Online Appendix 2 presents the excluded studies. is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
(which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20048892 doi: medRxiv preprint
This systematic rapid review included 38,415 participants (total) . Most of the studies (59%) were conducted in Asian countries, including China (30%), South Korea (18%), Taiwan (15%) or Singapore (12%). The mean number of participants was 612 (range 26 to 10,511). More than two-thirds (69%) examined the impact of Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS epidemic), followed by Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) (11%). Three studies examined the impact of COVID-19. 46 53 83 Most studies were conducted during or after the infectious outbreak (92%). Around three quarters took place in the hospital setting. General HCWs was the most common group (70%), followed by nurses (20%) and physicians (10%).
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (38%), anxiety (36%), depression (28%) and stress/distress symptoms (28%) were the mental health conditions most frequently examined.
The majority followed a cross-sectional design (82%). The characteristics of the included studies are summarised in Table 1 .
In general, main risks of bias in the 50 cross-sectional studies were the lack of use of reliable and valid instruments to measure mental health outcomes (high risk of bias in 22% of the studies) and selection bias (12%). The main sources of bias across the seven cohort studies were selection bias (43%) and inadequate follow-up of the cohorts (29%). Main sources of bias of the two uncontrolled before-after studies were bias in selection of participants, and bias in outcome measurement. The case-control and the systematic review identified did not present serious risks of bias. Results of the risk of bias assessment are provided in Online Appendix 3. 
Thirty-seven studies examined a large number of occupational, sociodemographic and social factors associated with the likelihood of developing mental health problems while providing frontline healthcare during an infectious disease outbreak (Online Appendix 4).
The main occupational factors were working in a high risk environment, higher perception of threat and risk, specialised training received, and specific occupational role. Working in a high risk environment was associated with different mental health problems, namely depression, 46 anxiety, 46 52 60 77 PTSD, 28 72 75 81 82 and burnout. 76 The definition of high risk environment varied across studies, but usually included being in direct contact with infected patients, either providing care, 28 77 or being responsible for cleaning and disinfection. 52 Likewise, higher perception of threat and risk was also associated with a higher prevalence of a number of different mental health problems, including depression, 55 anxiety, 25 and PTSD. 63 72 81 Lack of specialised training was a risk factor for anxiety, 60 79 PTSD, 75 and burnout. 63 Some of the studies that recruited more than one cadre reported that specific HCWs were at higher risk of developing mental health problems. One study each found that nurses were more likely to develop PTSD 75 and burnout, 76 whereas one study 26 reported that resident pulmonologists were at higher risk of burnout.
Other occupational risk factors for PTSD were job stress, 63 and less job experience, 75 whereas lower levels of organisational support increased the risk of burnout. 59
Studies addressing sociodemographic and social risk factors focused on PTSD and burnout.
Younger age was a risk factor for both PTSD 75 and burnout, 26 while female gender was associated with higher levels of PTSD in HCWs. 75 Feelings of social rejection or isolation, 63 and higher impact of the outbreak on daily life 72 increased the likelihood of developing PTSD, whereas lack of family and friends support were associated with burnout. 43 In addition, stigmatisation, 44 social rejection, 67 and lower levels of social support were identified as risk factors for stress. 83
Five studies 24 Folkman and Greer's model of coping. 84 The session focused on stressors associated with pandemic influenza and on organisational and individual approaches to building resilience and reducing stress. While most participants did not feel prepared to deal confidently with the pandemic before the session (35%), there was a higher proportion of participants who felt better able to cope after the session (76%).
Maunder and colleagues explored the impact of a computer-assisted resilience training to prepare HCWs for a potential pandemic influenza. 62 The course consisted of modules incorporating different modalities of learning (knowledge-based modules, relaxation skills, and self-assessment modules using questionnaires to characterize interpersonal problem and coping style). The intervention improved confidence in support and training, pandemic selfefficacy and interpersonal problems (p<0.05). We have very low confidence on the evidence of educational interventions for preventing the psychological impact of infectious epidemic outbreaks in HCWs (detailed in Online Appendix 7) due to the study design (uncontrolled before-after studies) and very serious risk of bias with regard to confounding and measurement of outcomes.
Two studies examined two multifaceted interventions combining training and implementation of organizational changes. 33 70 A study in Taiwan 33 evaluated the effects of a multifaceted intervention to prevent depression and anxiety in hospital nurses during the SARS epidemic.
The intervention included in-service training, manpower allocation, gathering sufficient protective equipment, and establishment of a mental health team. The authors observed statistically significant improvements in nurses' anxiety and depression along with sleep quality at two weeks follow-up. Another study described a multifaceted intervention to improve resilience and prevent PTSD in HCWs during the Ebola epidemic in the USA, Philippines, and
West Africa. 70 The intervention, based on the Anticipate, Plan and Deter Responder Risk and
Resilience model, included pre-deployment development of an individualized resilience plan and an in-theatre, real-time self-triage system, to allow HCWs to assess and manage the full range of psychological risk and resilience for themselves and their families. The potential effectiveness of this intervention was not studied. Our confidence on the evidence for multifaceted interventions for preventing the psychological impact during infectious epidemic outbreaks in HCWs was very low (Online Appendix 7) due to limitations in the study design (uncontrolled before after studies) and very serious risk of bias (high risk of selection bias and high risk of bias in measurement of outcomes).
Finally, Khee et al. 2004 reported an intervention in 188 hospital nurses in Singapore, consisted in the provision of psychological support during the SARS outbreak. 40 The intervention, not based on any specific psychotherapeutic model, comprised multiple sessions (75 minutes per session) and was aimed at preserving their mental health. The primary goal of therapy was to externalise all their emotions, and bring support to each other. The effectiveness of this intervention was not studied.
In this timely systematic rapid review we synthesized evidence from 61 studies examining the impact on mental health of providing frontline healthcare during infectious disease outbreaks.
Results showed that HCWs commonly present high levels of anxiety, depression, PTSD, acute disorder and burnout, both during and after the outbreaks. We identified a broad number of risk factors for these conditions, including sociodemographic factors such as younger age and female gender, and social factors such as lack of social support, social rejection or isolation, stigmatization. Occupational factors entailed working in a high risk environment (frontline staff), specific occupational roles (e.g., nurse), and having lower levels of specialized training, preparedness and job experience. In contrast with the high number of studies examining impact on mental health, there is limited evidence regarding the impact of interventions to reduce mental health problems in this particularly vulnerable population, and overall its certainty is very low, mainly due to study design and serious risk of bias.
This is a timely and comprehensive rapid review of the current literature on the impact of infectious disease outbreaks on the mental health of HCWs. We examined three relevant areas, namely the prevalence of mental health problems, factors associated with an increased likelihood of developing those problems, and the effects of interventions to improve mental health of HCWs. We followed the highest methodological standards when undertaking the current rapid review, 10 and we used the GRADE approach to evaluate the certainty of the evidence, in order to facilitate evidence-informed decision making processes. Our review team is also a strength, as it included experts in evidence synthesis, Cochrane authors, members of the GRADE Working Group, physicians, nurses, editors, psychologists, and psychiatrists. There were also some limitations underlying this work. Despite searching three major databases and manually searching references of previously published systematic reviews, we did not examine gray literature; hence, we cannot discard that relevant references may have been missed out.
We observed high heterogeneity when pooling data, which could be partially attributed to the high variability across studies in terms of study population (e.g. occupational role), context (e.g. magnitude of the health emergency caused by epidemic) and outcome measures. In light of this, our results should be interpreted with caution.
. CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
(which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20048892 doi: medRxiv preprint
Some of the risk factors associated with mental health problems while providing frontline care during infectious disease outbreaks cannot be modified. In this way, working in a high risk environment increases the risk of developing clinically significant symptoms, namely depression, 46 anxiety, 46 52 60 77 PTSD, 28 72 75 81 82 and burnout. 76 Likewise, it seems like specific cadres are more likely to report mental health problems, namely PTSD, 75 and burnout. 26 76 However this review also identified specific modifiable factors that can be addressed in advance and mitigate the risk brought by the aforementioned factors. Lack of specialized training was associated with anxiety, 60 79 PTSD, 75 and burnout, 63 and higher perception of threat and risk was associated with depression, 55 anxiety, 25 Continuous communication between HCWs and managers, including the provision of up-todate facts about the progression of the outbreak, can convey institutional support, 59 and promote the acquisition of knowledge and confidence for those HCWs who have less job experience. 75 Likewise, managers are essential to mitigate feelings of social isolation 50 63 and stigmatization, 44 especially among those HCWs who have to be quarantined. 13 The proliferation of online mobile-based technologies will play an essential role in promoting connectedness and decrease the feelings of isolation and stigmatization, 86 and can also be used for informal contacts between HCWs who are quarantined.
Although limited, evidence from intervention studies indicates that educational interventions have the potential to increase knowledge and resilience, 24 62 even when implemented during an outbreak. 33
We identified 56 studies reporting on the impact on mental health of providing frontline healthcare during an infectious disease outbreak, however most of the studies did not use validated methods to assess mental health, which limits the generalizability of our findings.
Furthermore, only a handful of studies assessed the efficacy of interventions to ameliorate the impact of health emergencies on mental health of HCWs.
. CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
(which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20048892 doi: medRxiv preprint It is expected the proliferation of a large volume of studies examining the impact of COVID-19 on HCWs´ mental health during the near future. To make progress in this area, future studies should address these limitations of the available literature. The use of validated measurement tools and more representative sample sizes are warranted in order to strengthen the quality of the evidence in this area. Intervention studies should also adhere to international reporting standards such as CONSORT 85 and TIDieR. 87
As we demonstrated in our review, the mental health burden for HCWs during pandemics is especially high both during and after the outbreak. Of note for its similarity to the current COVID-19 crisis, are the experiences gained from the previous SARS outbreak. This time, given the size, scale and importance of the current pandemic, these trends could be much worse.
We urge governments, policy makers and relevant stakeholders to monitor and follow these outcomes and conduct scientifically sound interventional research, in order to mitigate mental health impact on HCWs.
The physical health of HCWs is already at stake from the virus, and once we tackle the current pandemic, we will need to heal the healers, not only for the sake of having a prepared and resilient work-force, but as we owe them from the tremendous sacrifices they are doing. If we want to address these concerns and be able to mitigate its impact, we need to act soon.
. CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
(which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20048892 doi: medRxiv preprint
Searches Hits 1 exp Health Personnel/ or ((health or health care or healthcare) adj2 (personnel or worker* or provider* or employee* or staff or professional*)).tw. or ((medical or hospital) adj2 (staff or employee* or personnel or worker*)).tw. or (doctor* or physician* or clinician*).tw. or (allied health adj2 (staff or personnel or worker*)).tw. or paramedic*.tw. or nurse*.tw. or (nursing adj2 (staff or personnel or auxiliar*) . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint 13 S9 OR S10 OR S11 OR S12 18,427 14 S1 AND S8 AND S13 405 . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20048892 doi: medRxiv preprint
❖ Excluded due to wrong study population (i.e., not healthcare professionals) . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint ❖ Excluded due to wrong context (i.e., not during or after a health emergency caused by an epidemic/pandemic). . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint ❖ Excluded due to wrong publication type (narrative reviews, thesis, editorials, protocols, and editor letters) 1 . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint . Bias . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20048892 doi: medRxiv preprint 6 56.7% reported being worried about A/H1N1 influenza pandemic. The level of anxiety was moderately high (median 6/9). The most frequent concern was infection of family and friends and the health consequences of the disease (54.9%).
The perceived risk of being infected was moderately high (median 6/9). Few HCWs (6.6%) had restricted their social contacts and fewer (3.8%) felt isolated by their family members and friends because of their hospital work, while a low percentage (4.3%) intended to take a leave to avoid infection. Worry and degree of worry were significantly associated with intended absenteeism (P<0.0005), restriction of social contacts (P<0.0005), and psychological distress P= 0.036). The order of total general severity index (GSI) scores from high to low was EVD survivors, SL medical staff, SL logistic staff, SL medical students, and Chinese medical staff. There were 5 dimensions (obsession-compulsion, anxiety, hostility, phobic anxiety, and paranoid ideation) extremely high in EVD survivors. GSI was inversely associated with university education. Depression (38.5% vs. 3.1%) and insomnia (37% vs. 9.7%) were greater in the SARS unit nurses than the non-SARS unit nurses. No difference was found in the prevalence of PTSD symptoms (33% vs. 18.7%), yet, three unit subjects (SARS ICU, SARS regular and Neurology) had significantly higher rate than those in CCU (29.7% vs. 11.8%, respectively) (P< 0.05). For the SARS unit nurses, significant reduction in mood ratings, insomnia rate and perceived negative feelings as well as increasing knowledge and understanding of SARS at the end of the study (all P< 0.001) indicated that a gradual psychological adaptation had occurred.
Chen 2005 (27) Taiwan SARS Wards or emergency units Nurses N=128 Depression (SCR), anxiety (SCR), PTSD (IES), intrusion and avoidance (IES), somatization, interpersonal sensitivity, hostility, psychoticism (SCR)
11% of the nurses had stress reaction syndrome. The symptoms of psychological stress reactions included anxiety, depression, hostility, and somatization. The highest rate of stress reaction syndrome was observed in the group that originally worked in a high-risk unit, and the conscripted group experienced the most severe distress on average. 
Park 2018 (28) MERS PTSD (PCL-C) 20.59% showed PTSD symptoms. The sample had a mean PCL-C score of 30±9.95. The differences in the scores of doctors and nurses with different genders, ages, professional titles, contact frequencies, trainings, and experiences were statistically significant (P<0.05, P<0.01). Moreover, ttests and one-way analysis of variance showed that nurses received higher scores than doctors, female participants received higher scores than male participants, and the participants with low professional title and high contact frequency, aged between 20 years and30 years, with less than five years of work experience, having not received related training and with no related experience obtained higher PCL-C scores than the others (P<0.05, P<0.01). The results of multinomial regression analyses showed that, with other relevant factors controlled for, being single, having been quarantined during the outbreak, having been exposed to other traumatic events before SARS, and perceived SARS-related risk level during the outbreak were found to increase the odds of having a high level of depressive symptoms 3 years later. Altruistic acceptance of risk during the outbreak was found to decrease the odds of high post-outbreak depressive symptom levels The lifetime prevalence of any depressive, anxiety, or substance use diagnosis was 30%. Only one HCW who identified the SARS experience as a traumatic event was diagnosed as having PTSD. New episodes of psychiatric disorders occurred among seven healthcare workers (5%). New episodes of psychiatric disorders were directly associated with a history of having a psychiatric disorder before the SARS outbreak (P=0.02) and inversely associated with years of healthcare experience (P=0.03) and the perceived adequacy of training and support (P=0.03).
Wu 2008 (35) SARS China Hospital HCWs N=549 PTSD (IES-R) Current alcohol abuse/dependence symptom counts 3 years after the outbreak were positively associated with having been quarantined, or worked in high-risk locations such as SARS wards, during the outbreak. However, having had family members or friends contract, SARS was not related to alcohol abuse/dependence symptom count. Symptoms of PTS and of depression, and having used drinking as a coping method, were also significantly associated with increased alcohol abuse/dependence symptoms. The relationship between outbreak exposure and alcohol abuse/dependence symptom count remained significant even when sociodemographic and other factors were controlled for. When the intrusion, avoidance and hyperarousal PTS symptom clusters were entered into the model, hyperarousal was found to be significantly associated with alcohol abuse/dependence symptoms All agreed SARS had changed their clinical practices. Significant anxiety was found in family doctors. Three quarters of respondents recalled requesting more investigations while a quarter believed they had over-prescribed antibiotics. GPs who were exposed to SARS or who had worked in high infection districts were less likely to quarantine themselves (10.8% versus 33.3%; P<0.01; 6.5% versus 27.5%; P<0.01 respectively). Exposure to SARS, the infection rates in their working district, and anxiety levels had significant impact on the level of protection or prescribing behaviour.
Brooks 2018 1
. CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20048892 doi: medRxiv preprint . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20048892 doi: medRxiv preprint . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. HCWs/ before, during, and after the emergency PTSD resilience plan and an in-theatre, real-time self-triage system, which together allow HCWs to assess and manage the full range of psychological risk and resilience for themselves and their families. It includes objective mental health risk factors to prompt activation of a coping plan, in connection with unit leadership real-time situational awareness to address responder risk early before PTSD and impairment become established.
implementation, but empirical data concerning its impact is not provided.
Khee 2004 (5) Psychological support group sessions (not based on any specific psychotherapeutic model). The scheduled period of time for each session was around 75 min. The primary goal of therapy was to externalize all emotions, and bring support to each other. All participants were committed to overcome issues encouraging one another to express their emotions.
Impact of the intervention per se not reported. Instead, the authors describe the psychological reactions experienced by the nurses to the emergency. At the beginning of the outbreak the nurses experienced dynamic development of specific behaviours (fear, anger, and blame). After the outbreak the participants developed a significant sense of grief and frustration after specific events such as the death of a colleague. Aiello et al. 2011 measured perceived efficacy based on two questions ("Prior to the session, I felt prepared to deal confidently with the situations that I might face in the event of a pandemic", and "Following today's session, I believe that I will be better able to cope in the event of a pandemic") rated on a 5-point agreement scale. While most participants did not feel prepared to deal confidently with the pandemic before the session (35%), there was a higher proportion of participants who felt better able to cope after the session (76%). This difference was statistically significant (z = 17.98, p = 0.0020.)
Coping style Coping via problem-solving, seeking support from others and escape-avoidance were measured with subscales of the Ways of Coping Inventory an instrument which yields eight subscales of coping strategies. In this study coping scales were selected that have predictive power with respect to longterm stress-related outcomes of working during the SARS outbreak. Coping scales were calculated as the mean of item scores on a 4 point scale from 0 ("Not used") to 4 ("Used a great deal"). Problem-solving and seeking support were both normally distributed. Cronbach's alpha was 0.76 for problemsolving and 0.77 for seeking support. Escape-avoidance was skewed toward zero. Cronbach's alpha 0.73. Coping with stress using problem-solving, seeking support from others or through escapeavoidance did not change over the course. . After implementation of the SARS prevention program, the mean scores of anxiety level decreased with time. The mean score from the first questionnaire before caring for SARS patients is 60 points (SD= 9.28), indicating moderate anxiety compared to the mean scores of after the implementation of the anti-SARS program, the mean scores of 51, 50, and 46 indicating mild anxiety, mild anxiety, no anxiety, respectively, at the remaining time points. GEE models showed that anxiety levels 2 weeks after the implementation of the prevention program and while caring for SARS patients were significantly lower than anxiety level before caring for SARS patients (p = 0:075). The anxiety level month after caring for SARS patients was also significantly lower than the anxiety levels before care of SARS patients (p<0:0001). After caring for SARS patients for 3 months and 1 month after the hospital returned to normal operations, nursing personnel exhibited anxiety levels significantly lower than that prior to caring for SARS patients (p<0:0001). . After the implementation of the SARS prevention program, mean scores of depression level decreased with time. At the time of the first questionnaire before care of SARS patients began, the mean score was 61 points (SD =12.62), indicating moderate depression. After program initiation, the mean scores of 51, 50, and 48 points indicated mild depression, mild depression, and no depression, respectively. Using GEE, the levels of depression 2 weeks after initiation of the SARS prevention program and while caring for SARS patients were significantly lower than the level before caring for SARS patients (p<0:0001). At 1 month after caring for SARS patients, the level of depression was also significantly lower than the levels of depression levels before the staff began to care for SARS patients (p<0:0001). After the hospital had returned to normal operations, the level of depression was significantly lower than that prior to taking care of SARS patients (p<0:0001).
Sleep quality 1 (3) observational studies serious a not serious not serious not serious none Sleep quality was measured with the Pittsburgh sleep quality index. The mean score from the first questionnaire was 12 points (SD =3.83), meaning that sleep quality was poor. Of the remaining three questionnaires, the mean scores were 10, 10, and 8 indicating poor sleep quality. GEE showed that the mean score at 2 weeks after the SARS prevention program began when the staff was caring for SARS patients was significantly lower than the mean score before they began caring for SARS patients (p =0.0053). At 1 month after caring for SARS patients and at 1 month after the hospital resumed normal operations, the mean score (p =0:0017) was also significantly lower than the score before the nursing care began (p =0:0008).
