bioRxiv preprint 2 ABSTRACT. Coronaviruses may produce severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). As a matter of fact, a new SARS-type virus, SARS-CoV-2, is responsible of a global pandemic in 2020 with unprecedented sanitary and economic consequences for most countries. In the present contribution we study, by all-atom equilibrium and enhanced sampling molecular dynamics simulations, the interaction between the SARS Unique Domain and RNA guanine quadruplexes, a process involved in eluding the defensive response of the host thus favoring viral infection of human cells. The results obtained evidence two stable binding modes with guanine quadruplexes, driven either by electrostatic (dimeric mode) or by dispersion (monomeric mode) interactions, are proposed being the dimeric mode the preferred one, according to the analysis of the corresponding free energy surfaces. The effect of these binding modes in stabilizing the protein dimer was also assessed, being related to its biological role in assisting SARS viruses to bypass the host protective response.
This work also constitutes a first step of the possible rational design of efficient therapeutic agents aiming at perturbing the interaction between SARS Unique Domain and guanine quadruplexes, hence enhancing the host defenses against the virus.
Coronaviruses inducing severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) gained first worldwide attention in 2003 following the outbreak of SARS disease that mainly affected different southeastern Asian countries. 1-3 By the end of 2019 and the beginning of 2020, a novel coronavirus, styled SARS-CoV-2, has emerged and caused the Covid-19 pandemic. 4-7 At the time of writing this communication, Covid-19 has spread in all continents, excluding Antarctica. In April, the 5 th 2020 a number of more than 1 million confirmed cases has been reported, as well as more than 66,000 deaths. 8 Furthermore, severe limitations and social distancing measures have been implemented by an increasing number of countries, in the attempt to limit the spreading of the pandemic. 9 Indeed, coronaviruses, and SARS-CoV-2 in particular, are characterized by high infectious and transmissibility rates, and may, in certain cases, severely attack the lungs and the respiratory system, an occurrence which can lead to the necessity of respiratory assistance and even to death, especially in presence of others comorbidities. [10] [11] [12] Since the first outbreak of the pandemic, important scientific works appeared, aiming at understanding at a molecular level the mechanisms of action of SARS-CoV-2, and corona viruses in general, that may be related to its transmissibility and mortality. Important successes have notably been achieved in both genome sequencing and structural resolution of the different viral proteins, also with the assistance of molecular modeling and simulation. [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] In fact, the possibility of finding efficient therapeutic strategies requires the elucidation of the fine mechanism that mediate the virus attack to the host cell, the resistance to the host immune system, and finally its virulence. [22] [23] [24] [25] Among the multifaced protein envelope of coronaviruses the so-called non-structural protein 3 (Nsp3) represents a large protein, localized in the cytoplasm, consisting of about 2,000 amino acids and comprising several different domains, also including a transmembrane region. Among the . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.029447 doi: bioRxiv preprint 4 different domains of Nsp3, 26 ,27 whose precise function of some of them has not been entirely clarified yet, the so-called SARS Unique Domain (SUD) deserves a special attention, since it is present only in SARS-type coronaviruses and hence it has been associated to the increased pathogenicity of this viral family. The structure of SUD (presumably a common domain of different SARS viruses) has been resolved experimentally, [28] [29] [30] and it has been proved that the macrodomain is indeed constituted by a dimer of two symmetric monomers. Furthermore, both experimental and molecular docking investigations have pointed out a possible favorable interaction of SUD with nucleic acids, and in particular with RNA in G-quadruplex (G4) conformation. 28 The presence of a high density of . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.029447 doi: bioRxiv preprint 5 lysine residues at the interface between two SUD monomers, forming a positively charged pocket, also suggests that RNA may be instrumental in favoring SUD dimerization, due to the negative charge of the RNA backbone hence suggesting the occurrence of electrostatic attraction. This observation may have a highly important biological implication since the dimerization has also been connected to the SUD native function. Tan et al 28 have proposed that the ability of SUD to recognize and bind specific viral and/or host G4 sequences may have implications in regulating viral replication and/or hampering the host response to viral infection, as schematized in Figure 1 .
The hypothesis is based on the identification of G4 sequences in key host mRNA that encode proteins involved in different signaling pathways such as apoptoting or survival signaling, [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] these proteins could induce a controlled cellular death of infected cells slowing down or stopping the infection, or promote cell survival to delay apoptosis by producing antiviral cytokines. 37 However, the removal of the mRNA necessary to produce these signaling factors by viral SUD may impair the apoptosis/survival response pathways allowing massive cell infection. 28, 37 In this letter, we report an extended all-atom molecular dynamics (MD) study of the interactions produced between a dimeric SUD domain and a short RNA G4 sequence. The crystal structure of the protein (pdb 2W2G) and of the oligonucleotide (pdb 1J8G) 39 have been chosen coherently with the experimental work performed by Tan et al. 28 Equilibrium MD has allowed to assess some of the hypothesized complexation modes between G4 and SUD, while also highlighting the most important interactions patterns at an atomistic level, and the effects of G4 in maintaining the dimer stability. Furthermore, to better sample the multidimensional conformational space and to quantify the strength of the interactions coming into play, the free-energy surface has been explored using enhanced sampling methods. A two-dimensional (2D) free energy profile has been computed along two coordinates defining the distance between the centers of mass of G4 and one SUD domain . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.029447 doi: bioRxiv preprint 6 (G4-SUD A ), and the two SUD domains (SUD A -SUD B ), respectively. The corresponding 2D potential of mean force (PMF) was obtained using a recently developed combination of extended adaptative biased force (eABF) 40 and metadynamics, 41 hereafter named meta-eABF. 42 Both protein and RNA have been described with the amber force field 43 including the bsc1 corrections, 44, 45 and the MD simulations have been performed in the constant pressure and temperature ensemble (NPT) at 300K and 1 atm. All MD simulations have been performed using the NAMD code 46 and analyzed via VMD, 47 the G4 structure has also been analyzed with the 3DNA suite. 48, 49 More details on the simulation protocol can be found in Supplementary Information (SI). The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.029447 doi: bioRxiv preprint 7
The equilibrium MD simulations were started placing the G4 in the nearby of the SUD complex and the trajectories evolved yielding two distinct interaction modes, as reported in Figure 2 . In particular, we can easily distinguish between a first mode of binding in which the G4 mainly interacts with only one SUD monomer, called monomeric binding mode, and a second one in which the nucleic acid is firmly placed at the interface between the two protein monomeric subunits, referred as dimeric binding mode. The corresponding root mean square deviations (RMSD) with respect to the initial structure are also reported and globally show that both the RNA and the protein units are stable. As expected, a slightly larger value of the RMSD is observed for the protein, as a consequence of its larger flexibility compared to the rigid G4 structures (Figure 2 d, c). Note also that the slight initial increase of the protein RMSD observed for the dimeric mode is due to the necessity of a slight structural rearrangement to accommodate the G4 in the interaction pocket. Both modes are also globally stable all along the MD trajectory, and no spontaneous release of the G4 is observed. However, at the end of the trajectory the dimeric mode exhibits a slight slipping from the center of the interface area. This is probably due to the relative short length of the oligomer, also in agreement with previous experimental observations. 28 Apart from the different positioning of the G4, other structural evidences can already be surmised from the visual inspection of the MD trajectory. In particular, the SUD dimers appear more compact and the interface region better conserved when the RNA G4 adopts the dimeric binding mode.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.029447 doi: bioRxiv preprint Interestingly, the specific interaction patterns between G4 and the protein are different between the two binding modes, providing an extremely important different behavior. Indeed, the main driving force for the dimeric-like binding mode is the presence of extended electrostatic interactions between the negatively charged RNA backbone and the highly positive interaction pockets of the SUD complex. As a matter of fact, eleven Lys resides in the interaction pocket (shown in green in Figure 3a ) allowing persistent salt-bridges and hydrogen-bonds with the RNA phosphates. This finding is evidenced by the radial distribution function (RDF) between these positively charged lysine side chains and the negatively charged phosphate oxygen atoms of G4 (depicted in dark blue in Figure 3b ), which shows a very intense and sharp peak at around 2 Å ( Figure 3a ). Interestingly, a secondary peak in the RDF is also observed at 3.5 Å, probably defining The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.029447 doi: bioRxiv preprint a second layer of interaction patterns that should contribute to the overall stabilization of the binding. Conversely, the monomeric mode is not driven by electrostatic interactions and involves mainly the terminal uracil moieties and the top guanine leaflet instead of the phosphate backbone of G4. As shown in Figure 3b , hydrophobic dispersion interactions emerge through the action of a triad of amino acids, namely Ser236, Leu237, and Asn238, that position themselves on top of the terminal leaflet also interacting with the peripheral uracil nucleobases, in a mode strongly resembling the top-binding experienced by a number of G4 drugs. [50] [51] [52] This is nicely confirmed by the analysis of the time series of the distance between the a-carbon of these amino acids and the nearby guanine that readily drops at around 5 Å and stays remarkably stable all along the MD.
Interestingly, the interaction is sufficiently strong to induce a partial deformation of the planarity of the G4 leaflets. The fact that the monomeric binding mode is driven by dispersion interactions with one of the exposed G4 leaflets may also contribute explaining the fact that longer G4 sequences are preferentially recognized by the SUD interface region. Indeed, in this case, for obvious statistic reasons, the ratio between electrostatic and dispersion interactions clearly favors the latter. On the other hand, this mode may also act efficiently in the process of recruitment of RNA, either viral or cellular, efficiently anchoring the oligomer that can subsequently be safely displaced through the interface area.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.029447 doi: bioRxiv preprint As previously observed qualitatively, the presence of G4 in the dimeric binding mode induces rigidity in the SUD subunits interface due to the formation of the dimer. This effect can be quantified by analyzing the distribution of the distance of a tweezer in the SUD interface area formed by the residues Ala355 and Arg266, as reported in Figure 4 . Indeed, while in the case of the dimeric-like conformation a peaked distribution centered at relative close distances (6.7 Å) is observed, indicating a closed and quite rigid disposition, a much broader and bimodal distribution is found for the monomer-like conformation, presenting, most notably, a secondary maximum at about 11 Å, which confirms the partial destabilization of the SUD subdomains interface and the greater flexibility induced by this binding mode. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.029447 doi: bioRxiv preprint
To further examine the conformational space spanned by the G4/SUD complex, and in particular the role of the RNA in favoring the dimerization and the structure of the interface, we resorted to enhanced sampling MD simulations to obtain the 2D free energy profile along two relevant collective variables: first, the distance between G4 and SUD, and second, the separation between the two SUD subdomains. To further examine the conformational space spanned by the G4/SUD complex, and in particular the role of the RNA in favoring the dimerization and the structure of the interface, we resorted to enhanced sampling MD simulations to obtain the 2D free energy profile along two relevant collective variables: first, the distance between G4 and SUD, and second, the separation between the two SUD subdomains. The PMF is reported in Figure 5 together with representative snapshots along the reaction coordinates. A slightly less stable and extended region is also observed around the principal minimum having a stabilization free energy of about 6 kcal/mol and corresponding to the sliding of G4 slides in the monomer conformation ( Figure   5c ). The rest of the free energy surface appears instead rather flat, accounting for the possibility to observe important conformational movements, basically destroying the SUD subdomain interface (Figure 5d ), that are instead hampered by the dimer-like conformation of the RNA. The free energy map unambiguously shows that the dimer mode is the preferred one, offering a specific target that may help in the development of new efficient antiviral agents against coronaviruses.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.029447 doi: bioRxiv preprint The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.029447 doi: bioRxiv preprint 13 interactions and appears to be more stable and is essential in rigidifying the protein dimer and stabilizing the SUD-G4 interface, the latter assures a great flexibility to the protein and is guided by dispersion interactions. Such stable interaction between SUD and G4-RNA can be related to the translational default of the concerned proteins (see Figure 1) . Furthermore, the monomer interaction mode, happening in a more solvent exposed region of the protein, can also play a role in recruiting RNA fragments in the first step of the SUD-G4 recognition.
SUD dimer is thought to have an important biological role in allowing coronaviruses to bypass host cell protective and immune systems, hence allowing the virus morbidity and transmissibility.
The destabilization of the SUD/RNA complex, that could be achieved for instance by specific G4 ligands, or by competitors for the two G4 recognition spots evidenced in SUD, may constitute appealing potential therapeutic strategies. This is particularly true since these protein domains are shared by the family of SARS-type viruses and thus represent a molecular target that could stay operative in case of future mutations leading to new viral strains. As a continuation of the present work, we plan to address the study of the interaction between specific ligands and RNA G4 oligomers, also taking into account the perturbation induced on the recognition by SUD.
Supporting Information. Details of the protocol used for equilibrium MD and free energy determination, analysis of the structural parameters of the G4 unit and of the set-up of the SUD initial structure, time series of the distance between the residues defining the opening of SUD.
The following files are available free of charge.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.029447 doi: bioRxiv preprint
