We have developed a novel detection system which couples CRISPR-Cas recognition of target sequences, Cas mediated nucleic acid probe cleavage, and quantum dots as highly sensitive reporter molecules for instrument-free detection of viral nucleic acid targets. After target recognition and Cas mediated cleavage of biotinylated ssDNA probe molecules, the probe molecules are bound to magnetic particles. A complimentary ssDNA oligonucleotide quantum dot conjugate is then added, which only hybridizes to un-cleaved probes on the magnetic beads. After separation of hybridized from unhybridized quantum dot conjugates by magnetic sequestration, the signal is measured fluorometrically to provide a signal proportional to the cleaved probes and therefore the amount of target nucleic acid. To demonstrate the power of this assay, a 250 bp DNA target sequence matching a portion of the African swine fever virus (ASFV) genome is used and a detection limit of ~0.5 nM is achieved without target amplification using a simple portable ultraviolet flashlight. The positive samples are readily confirmed by visual inspection, completely avoiding the need for complicated devices and instruments. This work establishes the feasibility of a simple, instrument free assay for rapid nucleic acid screening in both hospitals and pointof-care settings.
KEYWORDS -CRISRPR-Cas12a, quantum dot (Qdot), magnetic bead (MB), point-of-care (POC), pathogen detection author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. : bioRxiv preprint viral infection use highly sensitive and specific real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) 11,12 .
Although these tests are highly sensitive and accurate, they require a laboratory setting for use, bulky instruments, sophisticated operations, and they are therefore not field deployable. These issues present a significant bottleneck to rapid and widespread testing, hindering our ability to respond to emerging pandemics. Recently, rapid POC systems using isothermal amplification have been demonstrated for viral pathogen detection 13 , however they have limited throughput and poor sensitivity. Given the limitations of existing viral pathogen testing methods, there is a significant need for simpler testing methodologies that do not require complex instrumentation, and that can be performed easily in the field.
An ideal POC device that can combat modern era pandemic crises should be simple, inexpensive, accurate, and must be easily operated and understood by people without special training. A recently discovered technology called clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) in conjunction with CRISPR-associated proteins (Cas) has shown great promise as an alternative to 15 . This method is significantly simpler than RT-PCR since it does not require complex instrumentation to perform. Certain Cas nucleases such as Cas12a and Cas13a can be activated to indiscriminately cleave single-stranded DNA or RNA substrates once they identify and bind with the target DNA or RNA 16,17 . The activated Cas enzymes cleave a nucleic acid probe, releasing a fluorophore author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. : bioRxiv preprint from a quencher molecule, thereby generating signal. CRISPR-Cas systems have also been linked with isothermal amplification methods to achieve highly sensitive and specific detection of pathogens 18,19 .
However, most CRISPR-Cas detection systems utilize reporter probes with organic dyes that require external instruments and possess a high fluorescence background, which limits overall sensitivity 20 .
In this study, we develop a novel probe system for CRISPR-Cas nucleic acid assays which use quantum dot as a reporter. Compared to conventional organic fluorescence dyes, Qdots have unique electronic and optical properties such as stable signal intensity, narrow emission spectrum, continuous broad excitation spectrum, and high quantum yields, making them an ideal fluorescence indicator for in vitro diagnostics 21,22 . After target recognition and Cas mediated cleavage of biotinylated ssDNA probe molecules, the probe molecules are bound to streptavidin-coated magnetic particles. A complimentary ssDNA oligonucleotide quantum dot conjugate is then added, which only hybridizes to un-cleaved probes on the magnetic beads. After separation of hybridized from unhybridized quantum dot conjugates by magnetic sequestration, the signal is measured fluorometrically to provide a signal proportional to the cleaved probes and therefore the amount of target nucleic acid. Our use of magnetic particle sequestration effectively reduces background signal, enabling use highly sensitive quantum dots as reporters. As a proof of principle for viral pathogen detection, a double-stranded DNA segment matching a portion of the African Swine Fever Virus (ASFV) genome was selected as the detection target. Without target amplification, we achieved a detection limit of 0.5 nM by using a small and inexpensive UV flashlight as the excitation source. This simple and instrument-free protocol pave the way for next-generation POC and field deployable viral pathogen detection applications. Fig. 1a shows the workflow of the Qdots-CRISPR based fluorometric nucleic acid detection.
Oligonucleotide DNA linker probes with a biotin label are mixed with a Cas12a-crRNA complex. With the presence of a double-stranded target DNA (part of the ASFV genome), the Cas12a-crRNA complex is activated and indiscriminately cleaves the single-stranded linker probes in the assay. After the reaction, author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Using our Qdot-CRISPR based DNA detection strategy, we report a very low detection background compared to conventional CRISPR-Cas systems that use fluorophore-quencher substrate as reporters. The cleaved ssDNA probes linked to the Qdots are detected by isolating the magnetic beads, thus avoiding the high background issues from the uncleaved fluorophore-quencher probes in the assay. This is essential to enhance the overall detection sensitivity of CRISPR-Cas systems, and is especially useful for instrumentfree detection in resource-limited environments 29,30 .
Currently, our approach can achieve a detection limit of ~0.5 nM without any target amplification. To improve the sensitivity, our assay can be easily integrated with established isothermal nucleic acids amplification methods such as recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) 31,15 or Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) 32,33 to extend the detection limit to attomolar level. The amplification reagents can be mixed with CRISPR Cas12a protein and crRNA as a "one-pot" assay.
Furthermore, our assay is poised to be developed for high-throughput multiplexing detection purposes.
Because CRISPR Cas12a assay is an indiscriminate DNase activity 14,34 , linker probe A and reporter probe B can be used as universal reporters for the detection of various DNA targets by only changing the crRNA sequence to match the target sequence. In addition, Cas13a protein demonstrates a similar indiscriminate RNase activity as Cas12a 35,16 . Thus, our assay presented here should be able to detect both DNA and RNA targets for multiplexing detection.
Materials and Methods
A cleavage: The total volume of CRISPR Cas12a-based cleavage assay was 20 µL including LbCas12a protein (New England BioLabs, Inc.), crRNA, linker probe A, and binding buffer. Briefly, 50 nM of LbCas12a was assembled with 62.5 nM of crRNA at room temperature for 10 min. Afterward, 1.25 µM of linker probe A, 1× Binding buffer, 14.5 µL of Nuclease Free Water (IDT, Inc.), and target DNA (concentration ranging from 0.1 nM to 50 nM) were mixed with the LbCas12a-crRNA complex to initiate the reaction. The mixture was incubated in a water bath at 37 °C for author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Figure 2. Validation of the MB-Qdot conjugation formation. (a) Emission curves of collected supernatants. The conjugation sample consists of magnetic beads, DNA probes, and Qdots. The control sample consists of magnetic beads, Qdots, and reporter probes. The Qdots sample is the streptavidincoated Qdots (2.6 nM). (b) Fluorescence signals of released Qdots by DNase treatment versus streptavidin-coated magnetic beads. Inset shows the integrated fluorescence signals and photographs of the suspensions under UV illumination. Error bars are standard deviation of the mean. author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Figure 3. Optimization of the MB-Qdot conjugation. (a) Integrated fluorescence signal of unbound linker probe A versus the input load of magnetic beads (0-600 µg). (b) Integrated fluorescence signal of unbound Qdots versus the input load of reporter probe B (0-80 pmoles). (c) Integrated fluorescence signals of collected Qdots supernatant versus the input load of linker probe A (0-100 pmoles). Inset shows the photographs of Qdots under UV illumination. Error bars represent standard deviation of the mean. author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Figure 4. Qdots-CRISPR based nucleic acid detection. (a) Fluorescence images of samples containing (i) matched target DNA (positive); (ii) mismatched target sequence (negative); and (iii) blank (no target input). The samples were illuminated by a UV flashlight (wavelength: 395 nm). (b) Integrated fluorescence signal (550-700 nm) of (i) matched target DNA (black triangle); (ii) mismatched target sequence (green triangle); and (iii) blank sample (0 nM). The red dot line shows the logistic fit of the integrated fluorescence intensity versus DNA concentration. (c) TEM images of the magnetic beads of mixed with (i) matched target DNA; (ii) mismatched target sequence; and (iii) blank (no target input).
author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Intensified infectious disease outbreaks have occurred more frequently in the past few decades due to the increased human population and global travel, and have included viruses as SARS 1, 2 , Ebola 3, 4 , Zika 5,6 , MERS 7, 8 , and the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) 9, 10 . The ongoing COVID-19 crisis has evolved as a global pandemic since it was first reported in December 2019. Due to the shortages of testing kits, vaccines, and treatments, the number of cases is still rapidly increasing in many countries. Since the development of vaccines and treatments for novel viruses can take as long as 18 months, the most efficient immediate approach to slow down and contain epidemics is to provide rapid and widespread testing, followed by the isolation of positive cases and their close contacts. The current standard tests for streptavidin-coated magnetic beads are added which bind both cleaved and uncleaved linker probes. A complimentary oligonucleotide DNA reporter probe which is conjugated to quantum dots is then added.
The reporter probe only binds to uncleaved linker probes on the magnetic beads. An external magnet is then applied to isolate the magnetic particles, leaving the unbound reporter probes in the eluate for fluorescence analysis. Since increasing the cleavage of the linker probe increases the amount of reporter probe remaining in the eluate, the fluorescence signal is proportional to the amount of starting target in the sample. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the streptavidin-coated quantum dots (mean diameter of 17.5 nm), streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (mean diameter of 1 µm) and hybridization of the Qdot reporter probe onto linker probes bound to the magnetic beads are presented in A custom designed fluorometer was used to confirm the successful formation of conjugates. As shown in MB-Qdots conjugation comprised of magnetic beads (100 µg), linker probes A (25 pmoles), reporter probes B (12.5 pmoles), and Qdots (156 fmoles) was mixed in the solution of 60 µL and pulled down by a magnet. Since the input Qdots were saturated by the other three components, no fluorescence signal was detected in the supernatant (Conjugation: red). To confirm the MB-Qdot conjugation was made by the hybridization of two DNA strands, we mixed magnetic beads, reporter probes, and Qdots without the input of linker probes. After magnetic isolation, a high fluorescence intensity (~14 counts) was detected, author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.10.036558 doi: bioRxiv preprint indicating that the MB-Qdot synthesis is dominated by DNA hybridization rather than non-specific absorption (Control: blue). To further confirm the MB-Qdots conjugation, the beads were washed 5 times followed by DNase I (EN0521, ThermoFisher Scientific) treatment to degrade the hybridized DNA strands. As shown in Fig. 2b , a distinct fluorescence peak was detected for the conjugation sample (red), while no signal was observed in the control sample (streptavidin-coated magnetic beads). The integrated signals of the fluorescence spectra (550-700 nm) were plotted (inset of Fig.2b) , where the conjugation sample shows ~2,000 counts, and is approximately 13 times higher than the control sample. In addition, for the conjugation sample, the bright pink fluoresence signal is easily observed by using a flashlight.
We then optimized the MB-Qdot conjugation assay to decrease the fluorescence background, which is essential for the CRISPR Cas12a-based detection strategy. Linker probes (100 pmoles) with 3' FAM modification (/5BioTinTEG/TTATTCTTATTGTGTGAACTGCTCCTTCTTGACTCCACC/36-FAM/)
were introduced to bind with the magnetic beads at weights of 0, 25, 100, 400, and 600 µg at room temperature for 15 min. After incubation, the magnetic beads were isolated, and the fluorescence intensity of the unbounded ssDNA was measured using a commercial spectrofluorometer (JASCO FP-8500, USA).
As shown in Fig. 3a , the integrated fluorescence intensity (500 to 700 nm) dramatically drops with the increase of the magnetic beads input from 0 μg to 400 μg. Adding more magnetic beads does not decrease the fluorescence intensity, indicating that the saturated ratio of magnetic bead to linker probe A is ~4 µg: 1 pmoles. Next, we optimized the ratio of reporter probes B to Qdots, which is the key to eliminate the fluorescence background. One pmoles of Qdots were selected and the load of reporter probe B was varied from 0 to 80 pmoles. As shown in Fig. 3b , a ratio of 80:1 between reporter probe B and Qdots shows the lowest background and is used for nucleic acid detection. To determine the optimized hybridization condition of linker probe A and reporter probe B, Qdots with a load of 0.5 pmoles were pre-mixed with 40 pmoles of reporter probe B (ratio of 1: 80), and then allowed to hybridize with magnetic bead-linker probe A conjugation (ratio of 4 µg: 1 pmoles). The retrieved Qdots were then measured by a custom designed fluorometer. The fluorescence intensity of the supernatant drops significantly by increasing the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.10.036558 doi: bioRxiv preprint load of linker probe A from 20 to 50 pmoles (Fig. 3c) . However, the intensity only shows a slight change when the load is further increased to 80 and 100 pmoles. Thus, we concluded that the saturated ratio of linker probe A to reporter probe B is ~2:1.
With the optimized MB-Qdot conjugation assay in hand, we then applied this protocol for instrument-free CRISPR detection. We added target DNA into the tube containing 50 nM of Cas12a, 62.5 nM of crRNA, and 1.25 µM of linker probe A with a total volume of 20 µL. As presented in Fig. 4a 
The work presented here leverages a CRISPR Cas12a assay and uses Qdots as an indicator. Unlike conventional organic dyes such as FAM, Qdots are brighter due to their high quantum yield and show much better photostability. Coupled with CRISPR Cas12a assay, the reaction is sensitive, rapid, and can be performed in isothermal conditions. Unlike methods such as PCR 23, 24 , electrochemical sensing 25, 26 , and surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy 27,28 , our assay does not require time-consuming sample processing, bulky sensing instruments, or complicated expert operation and data interpretation. These unique advantages enable us to demonstrate a simple and instrument-free diagnosis assay, ideal for rapid on-field applications.
author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.10.036558 doi: bioRxiv preprint from IDT, Inc., and the sequences are given in Table. 1.
Linker probe A isolation via magnetic beads: Firstly, 10 µL of magnetic beads (Dynabeads TM MyOne TM Stretpavidin C1, ThermoFisher Scientific) were washed with PBS buffer (Gibco TM, PH 7.4) for three times and resuspended in 10 µL of the PBS buffer. Next, the washed magnetic beads were transferred to a new 0.2 mL PCR tube, and the supernatant was discarded by isolating the magnetic beads with a magnetic rack (NEBNext® Magnetic Separation Rack, New England BioLabs, Inc.). The collateral cleaved products by CRISPR were then added to the magnetic beads at room temperature for 15 min.
After incubation, the magnetic bead-linker probe A conjugation was washed and resuspended in 20 µL PBS buffer for later use.
Conjugate Kit, ThermoFisher Scientific) with a concentration of 15.6 nM were mixed with 1.25 µM of reporter probe B (IDT, Inc.) to reach a 10 µL reaction mixture. To avoid photo-bleaching issues, the mixture was incubated in a dark environment at room temperature for 15 min.
The supernatant of the magnetic bead-linker probe A conjugation was first evacuated, followed by mixing with the reporter probe B-Qdot conjugation.
The mixture was placed on a tube rotator (BS-RTMNI-1, STELLAR SCIENTIFIC) and allowed to react at room temperature under mild shaking for 90 min. After that, the supernatant was collected and transferred to a new PCR tube.
To identify the presence of target DNA, collected Qdots were illuminated by using a portable flashlight (wavelength: 395 nm). To validate the instrument-free detection, the fluorescence intensity of the Qdots was measured by a custom designed fluorometer. As reported before 34 , the sample was added in a disposable cartridge and excited by a author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.10.036558 doi: bioRxiv preprint continuous wave semiconductor laser (wavelength: 488 nm). The collected fluorescence signal was analyzed by a portable spectrometer (USB 2000+, Ocean Optics).
TEM characterization: Transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL 2010) with a point resolution of 0.23 nm was used to characterize the samples. The supernatant containing Qdots was deposited onto a carbon-coated copper grid and left to evaporate. The TEM images were then captured through an AMT XR81 bottom mount camera with a 60 kV electron microscope.
author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.10.036558 doi: bioRxiv preprint FIGURES author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.10.036558 doi: bioRxiv preprint NTS: 5'-…TTTGACCACCCCAGTCATATCCGT…-3' TS: 5'-…ACG GAT ATG ACT GGG GTG GTC AAA… -3' crRNA uaauuucuacuaaguguagauAUCGGUAAGAAUAGGUUUGC author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.10.036558 doi: bioRxiv preprint
