author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.033522 doi: bioRxiv preprint Like other betacoronaviruses, SARS-CoV-2 encodes four major structural proteins: spike (S), membrane (M), nucleocapsid (N) and envelope (E). SARS-CoV E protein is abundant in infected cells and plays a crucial role in viral particle assembly. Moreover, the E proteins of SARS coronaviruses likely have important roles in pathogenesis by manipulating a number of cellular processes. Thus, SARS-CoV-2 E protein could also be a critical virulence factor. Ectopic expression of SARS-CoV E was reported to trigger apoptotic cell death of T lymphocytes, which could potentially contribute to the lymphopenia observed in fatal cases, though a causal association is unproven. A potential mechanism for inducing apoptosis was reported to involve an interaction between a putative Bcl-2 homology 3 (BH3)-like motif in SARS-CoV E and the antiapoptotic host protein Bcl-xL. Here we provide the first computational evidence indicating that both the SARS-CoV E and SARS-CoV-2 E have a C-terminal BH3-like motif. We used available sequence data for SARS-CoV-2 and related coronaviruses combined with structural information to evaluate the structure to biological activity relationships of the SARS-CoV-2 E BH3-like motif. Our analysis reveals a predicted interactome for E that is extensively wired to the Bcl-2 apoptotic switch that could potentially be a therapeutic target. Last, network reconstruction identified both the BH3-binding protein Bcl-xL and the autophagy effector Beclin 1, another BH3-containing protein, as vulnerable nodes in the host cellular defense system against SARS-CoV-2.
Keywords: coronavirus; covid-19; apoptosis; Bcl-2 family; BH3 motifs; protein-protein interactions; structure-function relationships; virus-host interactions 1 .
and other host responses, but much less is known about the E protein in SARS-CoV-2 (7, 8) .
The CoV E protein is the smallest of the virion structural proteins, consisting of only 75-109 amino acids across coronaviruses (for a recent review, see (9)). Recent biochemical and structural data revealed that SARS-CoV E is a viroporin endowed with ion channel and membrane-permeabilizing activities (10), forming homopentameric transmembrane α-helical bundles in lipid bilayers (11) . This protein is abundant in infected cells where it plays a crucial role in virus particle assembly, and appears to have multiple effects on membranes (12) (13) (14) . Compared to wild-type controls, recombinant coronaviruses lacking the E gene have significantly lower viral titers and reduced virus maturation and propagation (15) (16) (17) . E-deficient SARS-CoV is also severely attenuated in vivo, exhibiting diminished pathogenic effects (7, 18) and inability to replicate in the central nervous system (7), suggesting that the E protein may act as an important virulence factor in coronaviruses.
One potential virulence mechanism of the SARS-CoV E protein is via a sequence motif at its extreme C-terminus reported to bind to PSD95/DLG1/ZO-1 (PDZ) domains in other proteins (19) . This PDZ-binding motif (PBM) in SARS-CoV E is one of many types of small amino acid sequence elements that mediate protein-protein interactions (PPI), and are collectively referred to as short linear motifs (SLiMs). Like many other SLiMs, the PBM found in SARS-CoV E is present at the C-terminus within an intrinsically disordered region (20) . Through its PBM, SARS-CoV E was shown to engage in interactions with the globular PDZ domains of multiple host proteins such as syntenin and PALS1, and these latter interactions may contribute to airway inflammation and permeability of the lung epithelial barrier (18, 19) . Several interesting host proteins were recently reported to bind the E protein of COVID-19 virus SARS-CoV-2 using mass-spec pull-down, including bromodomain proteins involved in immune responses and targeted by other viruses (21) .
Several other host factors identified in this study suggest additional potential roles for E in manipulating host cell transcription and the Golgi vesicle trafficking pathway (21) .
SARS-CoV-2 E pulled down a subunit of the Golgi adaptor complex AP-3 that is targeted by HIV and West Nile virus (22, 23) .
Another potential virulence mechanism of the SARS virus E protein is via a second type of SLiM motif resembling the Bcl-2 homology 3 (BH3) motif found in pro-apoptotic BCL2 family proteins (8) . This BH3-like motif was reported to encompass residues 51 to 58
(LVKPTVYV) in the C-terminal region of SARS-CoV E, and subsequent mutagenesis author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.033522 doi: bioRxiv preprint experiments revealed that this amino acid stretch was important for interaction with Bcl-xL (8) . Consistent with a functional BH3 motif in the E protein, ectopic expression of SARS-CoV E induced apoptosis in T-cells, which was inhibited by the prosurvival Bcl-2 family member Bcl-xL (BCL2L1) (8) . Although this finding contrasts with in vivo studies of the avirulent E-deficient SARS-CoV, a unifying hypothesis would be if SARS-CoV E suppresses host cell stress responses, as suggested, leading to increased cell death and suppression of beneficial immune responses (14). Alternatively, E could activate a harmful overzealous immune response. However, follow-up studies are needed, as each of these molecular interactions is supported primarily by a single report.
BH3 motifs form a newly defined class of SLiMs (24) that have well-studied roles in the apoptotic PPI network, by binding to globular proteins of the Bcl-2 family (25, 26) . BH3 motifs were described or predicted in proteins from eukaryotes (primarily mammals) and from several unrelated microbial species: DNA viruses (HHV8, HBV, HCV), RNA viruses (e..g. Newcastle disease virus) and bacteria (Photorhabdus luminescens). The evolution of BH3 motifs appears to involve processes of divergent evolution, transfer events and random/convergent evolution (24) , including possibly through viral mimicry as previously suggested for other SLiMs (27, 28) . Elaborating on previous works (24, 29) , we provide here the first observation that the C-terminal region of SARS-CoV-2 E also possesses this BH3-like sequence. While great attention has been paid to the role of BH3 motifs in cancer (30) (31) (32) , research efforts are warranted to determine biological, clinical and therapeutic relevance of modulating CoV E BH3-like motifs and their associated PPI networks in the context of coronavirus pathogenesis. The prophylactic interest of using SARS-CoV-2 vaccines with an E protein harboring a mutated or deleted BH3-like motif can now also be explored.
.
The BH3-like motif identified by Yang et al. (8) in the SARS-CoV E sequence (GenBank Acc.# AAP73416) appears to slightly diverge from the BH3 motif of classical BH3-only proteins, justifying inclusion of SARS-CoV E in a large category of other reported BH3containing proteins (29) . This sequence divergence is not surprising given that, like many other well-established SLiMs, BH3 motifs display significant degeneracy, with diverse lengths (7-15 amino acids) and variable sequences at most of their amino acid positions. This is especially evident when structurally and evolutionarily distant BH3-containing proteins are considered altogether in a multiple sequence alignment (24) (Fig. 1 ).
author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.033522 doi: bioRxiv preprint Moreover, viral mimics often bear distant resemblance to host SLiMs (27, 28) . We used the CoV E sequence (GenBank Acc.# AAP73416) from SARS coronavirus ZJ01 as a reference to determine which viral proteins are most related. The overall sequence similarities between this reference SARS-CoV E protein and the E proteins from human coronavirus Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS-CoV), CoV-HKU1, CoV-OC43 and CoV-4408 are 69,5%, 68,3%, 67,8 and 65,5%, respectively. In comparison, the percent sequence identity between SARS-CoV E sequence and SARS-CoV-2 E is about 95% (pairwise similarity being 98,7%), reflecting the close genetic proximity between the virus causing the current outbreak and the SARS virus from 2003.
To gain insight into the conservation and evolution of CoV E BH3-like sequences, we performed multiple sequence alignments of CoV E sequences starting with the closest relatives to the SARS-CoV ZJ01 reference sequence in terms of phylogenetic proximity (betacoronaviruses) (Fig. 2 ) and adding more dissimilar sequences from the three other genera of Orthocoronavirinae (alpha-, gamma-and deltacoronaviruses). CoV E protein sequences were found in all clades but with various levels of similarity in the C-terminal domain where the BH3-like motif occurs (Fig. 3) . Based on the amino acid sequences of the BH3-like region, we analyzed the phylogenetic relationships between the CoV E proteins from the new SARS-CoV-2 and other coronaviruses derived from various species (Fig. 4) . CoV E sequences from gammacoronavirus rooted the phylogenetic tree, which provides evidence that their BH3-like region is more distantly related to the reference ZJ01 sequence than the homologous region from alpha-and deltacoronaviruses. Deltacoronavirus sequences were found to be more akin to sequences from betacoronaviruses than alphacoronavirus sequences. The SARS-CoV-2 E protein is in a cluster with bat CoV isolate RaTG13 and pangolin CoV isolate The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.033522 doi: bioRxiv preprint Motif-based sequence analysis suggested that coronaviruses have evolved a conserved and specific BH3-like motif (Supplementary File S1). Instead of conforming to the 6-mer L 1 -X 2 -X 3 -X 4 -X 5 -D 6 core pattern (with conserved leucine and aspartic acid residues) characteristic of most BH3 sequences (24, 29) , the BH3 signature inferred from betacoronavirus E sequences is an atypical 9-mer with a conserved Pro and reads as L 1 -X 2 -X 3 -P 4 -X 5 -φ 6 -Ω 7 -φ 8 -Ω 9 (with φ indicating a preference for aliphatic residues and Ω for aromatic residues) (Fig. 2, bottom) . Pro54 is totally conserved and one study found that it is critical for targeting of SARS-CoV E protein to the Golgi (34) . Mutagenesis of positions Leu51, Val56 and Val58 in the BH3 was reported to abrogate the ability of SARS-CoV E to interact with Bcl-xL (8) . The influence of the other residues present in the CoV E BH3like motifs (including the highly conserved Asn48 located three residues upstream of Leu51) on protein stability, subcellular targeting, function and interaction is unknown and awaits further characterization.
To predict structure-activity relationship, we constructed a structural model of the new virus SARS-CoV-2 E guided by the homologous structure of SARS-CoV E (PDB code: 5X29) (11) . In both the experimental structure for SARS-CoV E (Fig. 5A ) and the derived structural model for SARS-CoV-2 E (Fig. 5B) , the position of Leu51 is in a loop between two helices whereas the highly conserved Pro54 residue is located at the beginning of the C-terminal α-helix. Thus, despite a proline at this position, the BH3-like motif of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 E has intrinsic propensity for helix formation, like classical BH3s. Note that only four positions are different between full-length SARS-CoV E and SARS-CoV-2 E: two within the BH3-like helix (Thr55 and Val56 in SARS-CoV E, Ser55 and Phe56 in SARS-CoV-2) and two in a site immediately N-terminal to the PBM (where a pair of residues formed by Glu69 and Gly70 in SARS-CoV E is found instead of a single Arg69 residue in SARS-CoV-2 E). Except for Tyr57 (which contacts Leu28 located in the TM segment of the following chain), the BH3-like region (in red) appears to be only marginally involved in the inter-chain interactions needed to form the protein homopentamer (11), implying alternative roles for the BH3-like motif. Rather, the external orientation, and extended (i.e. irregular) structure of the BH3-like regions in the homopentamer (35) makes the CoV E BH3-like segment highly prone to serve as a small binding interface able to engage in transient interactions with protein partners, consistent with being a SLiM (24) . It is possible that the loop containing Leu51 may adopt a regular secondary structure upon binding to targets to form an extended α-helix, with the conserved Pro54 inducing formation of a kinked π-helix. author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.033522 doi: bioRxiv preprint Annotation of SARS-CoV-2 E from 3,449 SARS-CoV-2 genomes deposited in GISAID EpiCoV identified changes in at least 10 different residues in the E protein from SARS-CoV-2 isolates (Fig. 5C) . Five of these are in regions reported to interact with host proteins, including two in/near the BH3, V58L implicated in binding BCLxL and S50G
immediately adjacent, and three in the proximal 4-residue PBM, which would be expected to disrupt binding to PDZ domains (11) . When these 10 substitutions were mapped onto the SARS-CoV-2 E structural model, we found that the mutated residues are predicted to be primarily solvent-exposed on the pentamer and not buried, or involved in intra-and intermonomer contacts (Fig. 5B, white type) . This is in line with previous observations that the hydrophobic core of proteins from RNA viruses shows greater conservation than functional sites on the protein surface (36, 37) . Interestingly, we also annotated a sequence that harbors a deletion spanning eight amino acids Contradictory results have been reported regarding CoV E ability to induce or repress apoptosis (8, 42, 43) . Overexpressed epitope-tagged SARS-CoV E was found to promote apoptotic cell death in the Jurkat T cell line (8) , similar to 17Cl-1 cells infected with the mouse hepatitis virus (MHV) (murine coronavirus) (42) . Interestingly, although apoptosis of SARS-CoV-2-infected T cells has not yet been established (44), lymphocytopenia seems to be a common feature of COVID-19 patients (45) . In contrast, cells infected by a coronavirus lacking E (SARS-CoVΔE) were more primed for apoptosis than those infected with the wt strain (43) . This latter study also suggested that CoV E author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.033522 doi: bioRxiv preprint may have an anti-apoptotic function by suppressing the unfolded protein response (UPR), likely as a survival mechanism important for virus dissemination (46) . It may well be that CoV E activity could protect cells from cell death at early stages post-infection by regulating the UPR, and induce apoptosis at a later stage via Bcl-xL sequestration at the Golgi (8) or through its viroporin activity (10, 11) . Yang et al. (8) demonstrated that the interaction of SARS-CoV E with Bcl-xL is mediated by the BH3-like region of SARS-CoV E and the BH3 motif of Bcl-xL. Anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins normally accommodate the BH3 motif from typical BH3-only proteins in a hydrophobic receptor cleft partly formed by their own BH3 region (29) (30) (31) (32) . Hence, it remains to be determined whether SARS-CoV-2 E BH3 can bind in the hydrophobic groove of Bcl-xL or at another, distinct interface. It might also be interesting to assess the ability of BH3-mimetics like ABT-737, which tightly binds to the hydrophobic BH3-binding groove of Bcl-xL (47) , to inhibit binding of SARS-CoV-2 E to Bcl-xL. Bcl-xL and other family members also has other functions involving mitochondria and energetics that could be the targets of viral proteins (48, 49) .
In our reconstructed cellular interactome (Fig. 7) , the SARS-CoV-2 non-structural protein NS7a and protein E are linked to Beclin 1 (BECN1), which also harbors a BH3-like motif ( Fig. 1) (50) . Beclin 1 (also known as autophagy-related protein Atg6 or Vps30) is a component of the lipid kinase (PIK3C2/VPS34) complex important for autophagosome formation. Beclin 1 appears to coordinate apoptosis versus autophagy depending on its interacting partners. The BH3 of Beclin 1 interacts with the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 or Bcl-xL, which limits autophagy under basal conditions (50, 51) . To initiate autophagy following stress, the Bcl-2/Bcl-xL -Beclin 1 interaction is disrupted (52, 53) . Our predicted SARS-CoV-2 PPI network indicates that Bcl-xL provides a direct link connecting viral proteins to the autophagy regulator Beclin 1 (Fig. 7 , yellow lines).
Proteins that bridge different molecular functions in interaction networks are often referred to as bottleneck proteins. The fact that Beclin-1 interacts with many protein partners in the host interactome suggests that it is a hub. In PPI networks, hubbottleneck proteins tend to be essential, often disease-contributing proteins (54, 55) that represent preferential targets in virus infections (56) . Coronaviruses (including SARS-CoV) were recently reported to target Beclin 1 through their papain-like proteases to induce autophagy (57), thereby reducing downstream innate immune signalling. If SARS-CoV-2 also exploits the Beclin 1 hub, possibly through Bcl-xL targeting by E consistent with our analysis, this could contribute to pathogenicity by inhibiting antiviral innate immunity and concomitantly facilitate virus replication (58, 59) . In support to this, molecular actors implicated in autophagy and interferon type I response appear to author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.033522 doi: bioRxiv preprint aggregate in local interactome neighborhoods (Fig. 7, left) topologically connected to the SARS-CoV-2 network through Bcl-xL (Fig. 7, right) . It is tempting to speculate that SARS-CoV-2 may exploit both types of BH3s, cellular and viral (based on linear motif mimicry) (27, 28, 60) , to modulate host immune responses.
Like SARS-CoV (61), SARS-CoV-2 may be able to infect multiple cell types in several organs, with immune cells (in particular T-cells (44) ) and lung epithelial cells as prominent targets for the novel coronavirus. The SARS-CoV E protein has been reported to interact with the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family protein Bcl-xL through a BH3-like motif located in its C-terminal portion. Considering the importance of Bcl-2 homologs and BH3containing proteins in pathophysiological settings, the relevance of this interaction and its extrapolation from SARS-CoV to the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 may be revealing about the pathogenesis of COVID-19. In particular, detailed structural characterization and the identification of small molecule drugs able to disrupt this interaction could therefore provide a targeted therapeutic approach where coronavirus treatments are currently lacking or reliant on convalescent sera (62) . Recombinant SARS-CoV-2 deleted or mutated in the BH3-like region of E might also prove valuable for the design of a live, attenuated vaccine, with an E protein sufficiently intact to maintain structural integrity necessary for the virus life cycle, but mutated enough to abolish protein-protein interactions involved in viral pathogenicity. Last, PPI network reconstruction predicted that both the BH3-binding protein Bcl-xL and the BH3-bearing protein Beclin 1 might be (respectively directly and indirectly) targeted by SARS-CoV-2 to its own advantage, i.e., for interference with antiviral innate immune pathways.
. M e t h o d s a n d m a t e r i a l s
UniProtKB and GenBank nucleotide and protein sequence databases were searched for sequences related to human SARS-CoV E (Supplemental Table S1 ). Pangolin CoV E nucleic sequence was de novo assembled using metaSPADes v3.13.0 (63) from PRJNA573298 project raw reads data (64) after carefully removing reads mapped on
Manis javanica genomic sequences (INSDC: JSZB00000000.1) using bwa. Homologous sequences were aligned with the ClustalW alignment program implemented in the graphical multiple sequence alignment editor SeaView (65) or at NPS@ (66) using BLOSUM alignment matrices followed by manual optimization after visual author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.033522 doi: bioRxiv preprint inspection. Consensus sequence logos were generated with the online software WebLogo. A phylogenetic tree was calculated on 67 sites, with 1000 bootstrap replicates, using the BIONJ algorithm (67) embedded in Seaview v5.0.2.
A de novo motif discovery approach was implemented that used the MEME Suite (68) . A MEME formatted motif was generated from a seed FASTA file of representative BH3-like sequences of coronaviruses. MAST was used to search UniProtKB (release 2019_10) for sequences that match the MEME motif. For hit ranking, the P-value and E-value were computed.
The SARS-CoV-2 E protein has been modeled using M4T (69) and the known 3D structure of SARS-CoV E as template (PDB code: 5X29). The software PyMOL (https://www.pymol.org) was used for preparing the illustrations.
The predicted protein-protein interaction network of SARS-CoV-2 was constructed by using the VirHosNet 2.0 interology web service (39) on the COVID-19/SARS-CoV-2 special release (March 2020). We used the SARS-CoV-2 proteins annotated from Uniprot (https://covid-19.uniprot.org/) as a seed and inferred interology using gold standard protein-protein interaction annotated in VirHostNet. Interologs were defined based on known SARS-CoV protein-protein interactions by using 95% percent identity and 95 % protein coverage blastp thresholds. The putative SARS-CoV-2 interactome comprised 114 proteins and 218 protein-protein interactions and was completed with the recent experimental protein-protein interaction dataset published in (21) . We used VirHosNet 2.0 web service to explore the links between SARS-CoV-2 cellular protein partners and Beclin 1 in the context of autophagy and interferon type I response molecular interaction subnetworks by using a reconstructed cellular protein interactome as we have previously described (70, 71) .
This work was performed using the computing facilities of the LBBE/PRABI-AMSB. We gratefully acknowledge the authors, originating and submitting laboratories of the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.033522 doi: bioRxiv preprint sequences from GISAID's EpiCov Database (Acknowledgment Table is Supplementary   Table S3 ). Bcl-2 homologous proteins and experimental (biochemical and/or cell-based) evidence for direct interactions between them are critical additional criteria to validate BH3 motifs, in addition to sequence-based inference (29) . Note that the BH3 motif is an unusual SLiM type as it is found both in structured proteins, including Bcl-2 homologs, and in intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs), such as classical BH3-only proteins (24) . The figure was adapted from (24 (blue) and Pro54 (cyan) residues are indicated. Interchain contacts between monomers are indicated, Leu28 (green or yellow spheres) on one chain and Tyr57 (red spheres) in the following chain. Note that the recombinant SARS-CoV-2 E protein used to generate the 5X29 structure lacked ten residues at the C-terminus. (B) Homology-driven model of author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.033522 doi: bioRxiv preprint the SARS-CoV-2 E protein based on 5X29. Only one chain (framed in (A)) is shown. Left: Connection between the SARS-Cov-2 interactome and proteins involved in autophagy and interferon type I response. The autophagy and interferon type I response are contextualized in the graph as a molecular interaction subnetwork by using the human interactome as a framework. Each node corresponds to a protein and each edge to an interaction. Right: zoomed-in image of the framed part. The protein-protein interactions between SARS-CoV-2 E (VEMP_CVHSA) and Bcl-xL (BCL2L1_HUMAN), SARS-CoV-2 NS7a and Bcl-xL (BCL2L1_HUMAN), and Bcl-xL (BCL2L1_HUMAN) and
Beclin 1 (BECN1_HUMAN) are highlighted in yellow. author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.033522 doi: bioRxiv preprint S u p p l e m e n t a r y d a t a Supplementary File S1: Output file from the MEME-MAST analysis. The results show the sequences with significant overall matches to the query motif derived from the alignment of representative BH3-like sequences of coronaviruses.
Supplemental Table S1 : Dataset used in this study including Accession numbers, taxonomy and protein information (amino acid sequence, length).
Supplementary Table S2 : Information on SARS-CoV-2 isolates from different patients whose sequence was used in this study. 
