Background: Hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine have been used extensively in malaria and rheumatological conditions. Although generally safe and well tolerated they are potentially lethal in overdose. These two drugs are now candidates for the prevention and treatment of COVID19. In vitro data suggest that high concentrations and thus high doses will be needed if they are to be of benefit, but as yet there is no convincing evidence they are clinically effective. Nevertheless they are already being used very widely and fatal accidental overdoses have been reported.
Methods: Individual data from prospectively studied French patients who had taken intentional chloroquine overdoses and were managed in the national toxicology intensive care unit in Paris were pooled. Bayesian logistic regression was used to estimate a concentration-fatality curve. The probabilities of fatal iatrogenic toxicity with the chloroquine regimens currently being trialled for the treatment of COVID19 were estimated from a combined pharmacokineticpharmacodynamic model.
Findings: In total, 258 patients were studied of whom 26 died (10%). There was a steep sigmoid relationship between admission whole blood chloroquine concentrations and death. Concentrations above 13µmol/L (95% credible interval (C.I.), 10 to 16) were associated with greater than 1% mortality. Based on peak concentrations, absolute fatality ratios in the high dose arm (chloroquine base equivalent adult dose of 600mg given twice daily for ten days) of a recently terminated trial were estimated between 0.06% (90kg adult, 95%C.I. 0 to 0.3%) and 4.8% (40kg adult, 95% C.I. 1.9 to 9.7%). This regimen results in peak concentrations above 10µmol/L in more than 60% of adults weighing 70kg. The other high dose regimens trialled currently for COVID19 result in peak concentrations above 10µmol/L in only 0.2% of adults weighting 70kg.
Interpretation: High-dose chloroquine treatment regimens which result in whole blood chloroquine concentrations below 10µmol/L for the majority of patients should not result in life-threatening cardiovascular toxicity.
We searched Pubmed using the terms (chloroquine OR hydroxychloroquine) AND (suicide OR intoxication OR poisoning) AND concentration NOT mice, which returned 90 results. After excluding reviews, case reports with concentrations measured post mortem, healthy volunteer studies, animal studies and laboratory studies, 16 publications were retained. Of these, 12 were case reports and 4 were hospital cohorts. Case reports exhibited significant bias towards individuals with high concentrations who survived. Of the 4 hospital cohorts, we extracted data manually from one, and obtained the original data for two.
Added value of this study We provide an objective methodology to evaluate the risk of overdose for chloroquine treatment or prevention regimens currently being trialled in COVID19. This can be used to assess formally the risk-benefit trade-off when administering large doses for treatment .
Implications of all the available evidence Studies of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine for the treatment of COVID19 must balance the significant toxicity of high dose treatment regimens against their expected therapeutic benefit. The majority of treatment regimens and all preventive regimens under investigation have satisfactory safety margins.
Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are closely related 4-aminoquinoline drugs used for the treatment of malaria, amoebiasis and rheumatological conditions [1] . Until the late 1990s chloroquine was the drug of choice for the treatment of malaria. Hundreds of tonnes were consumed annually. Since then its use has declined because of widespread resistance in Plasmodium falciparum. Today there is greater use of hydroxychloroquine in rheumatoid arthritis and discoid and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are both weak antivirals with a broad range of activities (including flaviviruses, retroviruses, and coronaviruses) [2] [3] [4] [5] . Over 90 randomised clinical trials evaluating these drugs in both the prevention and treatment of COVID19 are now under way. The relatively weak antiviral activity against SARS-CoV2 in vero cell cultures has motivated trialling of higher loading and maintenance doses than usually given in malaria or hepatic amoebiasis [1] . This has caused concern over the potential for cardiovascular toxicity. Nevertheless, despite the lack of any convincing evidence of clinical benefit, these drugs are now being used so extensively in COVID19 prevention and treatment across the world that patients who need them for the treatment of malaria and rheumatological conditions are having difficulty obtaining them.
Borba et al. reported preliminary results from a randomised trial in Brazil of two dose regimens of chloroquine in COVID-19 treatment (CloroCovid-19 study, ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04323527) [6] . The trial was stopped early after recruiting only 81 patients because of cardiac toxicity and greater mortality in the higher dose group; two of 41 patients given the higher dose regimen developed ventricular tachycardia before death and 7 of 37 patients in this group developed electrocardiograph QTcF intervals over 500msec compared with 4 of 36 in the lower dose group. The high dose regimen, comprising 600mg base chloroquine administered twice daily for ten days, is substantially higher than recommended in malaria or rheumatological conditions [1] and represents the standard malaria loading dose repeated 19 times at 12 hour intervals.
Chloroquine is dangerous in overdose and has been used extensively for suicide. High concentrations of chloroquine cause hypotension, arrhythmias, coma, ARDS, and fatal cardiac arrest [7] [8] [9] [10] . In Zimbabwe the mortality of chloroquine in overdose was approximately six times higher than for other drugs [11] . In France in the early 1980s there was a suicide epidemic [7-10] following the publication of a book entitled Suicide: mode d'emploi (Suicide: a how-to guide) [12] . This unfortunate experience allowed characterisation of the factors associated with death from chloroquine overdose. Outcome in chloroquine self-poisoning depends on the dose ingested, the delay in reaching hospital and the quality of intensive care support. Using the blood concentration measurements taken from self-poisoning patients managed by experienced intensivists in the French National referral centre allowed development of a pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic model to estimate the relationship between chloroquine dosing and a fatal outcome. This model was applied to treatment regimens in current COVID-19 clinical trials and to a standard malaria treatment regimen for comparison.
2 . CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.20078303 doi: medRxiv preprint
The largest prospectively studied cohorts of self-poisoning with chloroquine have all been assembled by the national clinical toxicology unit in Paris, France (Réanimation Médicale et Toxicologique, Hôpital Lariboisière). The clinical and laboratory details of these cohorts have been published in detail previously [7] [8] [9] [10] . The extensive experience gathered in this clinical toxicology unit established the standard of care, including mechanical ventilation, appropriate sedation and optimum use of inotropes and vasopressors. Pre-hospital care was provided by emergency physicians in mobile intensive care units. These units could perform 12-lead electrocardiograms as well as advanced life support. Whole blood chloroquine concentrations were measured on admission by spectrophotometry (which does not distinguish between the parent compound and the biologiclly active desethyl metabolite) and at varying times subsequently.
Original data were available for all patients studied from 1987 to 1994 [8, 9] . Patients were included in the prospective studies if there was a history of attempted suicide and chloroquine was present in the initial sample of whole blood. For all patients studied in [9] , multiple whole blood chloroquine measurements were taken during the first 48 hours of hospital stay. The number and timing of samples varied between cases. Original data were not available for [7] so concentrations and outcomes were extracted from graphs in the publication (Figure 3 in [7]). Whole blood chloroquine concentrations and outcome could be determined approximately for all 102 patients. Data were extracted using the web version of WebPlotDigitizer (https://automeris.io/ WebPlotDigitizer/).
We also conducted a literature review of all published case reports and hospital cohorts on chloroquine poisoning. We extracted data from 12 case reports (13 patients) in which whole blood or plasma chloroquine concentrations were reported. We analysed only case reports in which blood or plasma concentrations were obtained ante-mortem as the post mortem redistribution of chloroquine from tissues to the blood is unknown. However, the data from the case reports exhibited significant bias towards patients with high concentrations who survived (i.e. unusual cases) so these were excluded from the final model.
Whole blood chloroquine concentrations following self-poisoning were determined using ultraviolet spectrophotometry at a wavelength of 343nm. This method does not differentiate between chloroquine and the biologically active desethyl metabolite. Pharmacokinetic modelling of data from healthy subjects and patients with malaria was then used to predict likely exposures, and thus toxicity risks with regimens being evaluated currently for COVID19. Chloroquine has complex pharmacokinetic properties characterised by an enormous volume of distribution and a terminal elimination half-life of over a month. Whole blood (the currently preferred matrix) concentrations are significantly higher than plasma concentrations because of binding to red blood cells, leukocytes and platelets. Two models were fitted in NONMEM (v.7.4.3, Icon Development Solution, Ellicott City, MD). The NONMEM simulation code is available online (see github repository link below). The first was a two-compartment disposition model using whole blood measurements from vivax malaria patients treated with a standard 25mg base/kg regimen over three days [13] (n = 75, with over 1000 concentrations measurements). Allometric scaling of body weight, with the exponent fixed to 0.75 for clearance parameters and 1 for volume parameters, was added to the model to predict concentrations at different body weights. The second model was a three-compartment model fitted to plasma chloroquine concentrations from healthy volunteers who took single 600mg base equivalent doses of chloroquine with or without primaquine [14] (n = 16), all individuals took a single dose on two separate occasions. Similar allometric scaling was applied. Published estimates for the plasma to blood ratio vary considerably (reviewed in [10] ). We selected a scaling ratio such that the predictions of median concentrations from the the model matched median concentrations in whole blood from three published studies with long duration follow-up [15] [16] [17] . This provided a plasma to whole blood concentration ratio of 3 .
Five potential chloroquine COVID19 adult treatment regimens, and one malaria treatment regimen were simulated:
1. 600mg base, twice daily for 10 days, as trialled in [6] .
3 . CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. .
2. 620mg base loading dose at 0 and 6 hours, followed by 310mg base twice daily (starting at 12 hours) for nine days. Except for the loading dose, this is identical to the regimen recommended by the Health Commission of Guangdong Province [18] .
3. 620mg base loading dose on day 1 at 0 and 6 hours, followed by 310mg base twice daily (starting at 12 hours) for six days.
4. Weight-based dosing regimen targeting loading doses at 0 and 6 hours of 10mg base/kg, followed by maintenance doses of 5mg/kg for 9 days, approximated using 155mg base whole tablets.
5. Weight-based dosing regimen targeting loading doses at 0 and 6 hours of 10mg base/kg, followed by maintenance doses of 5mg/kg for 6 days, approximated using 155mg base whole tablets. 6 . A "flat" malaria dosing regimen of 620mg base on days 1 & 2, followed by 310mg base on day 3, for the same range of weights.
Regimens 3&4 are "flat" dosing regimens (i.e. not weight-based). All regimens were simulated for weights ranging from 40 to 90 kgs.
We compared the relationship between admission whole blood chloroquine + desethyl metabolite concentration and death using logistic regression (maximum likelihood fit) for data gathered retrospectively (n = 91, [7]) and data collected prospectively (n = 258, [7-9]). The retrospective data gave substantially different results with much higher probabilities of death (approximately 60% versus 5% at 20µmol/L, see Figure S1 ). We therefore excluded the 91 retrospectively studied patients reported in [7] but retained the 11 prospectively studied patients. This gave a total of 258 unique observations.
We modelled the probability of death as a function of the log whole blood peak chloroquine concentration (µmol/L) using Bayesian logistic regression. The peak concentration is considered a latent variable (unobserved) for patients who reached their peak before hospital admission or for patients who only had their admission blood concentration measured (n = 200). The peak concentration is considered observed for the patients who had multiple concentration measurements and whose peak concentration was reached after hospital admission (n = 58). The model does not attempt to estimate individual peak concentrations for the patients for whom the peak was not observed, but rather an average difference δ, on the log scale, between peak and admission concentrations (this can be considered as a bias correction term). We assume that the probability of death, conditional on the peak concentration, was the same for those whose blood concentrations peaked before and those who peaked after hospital admission. In reality, this assumption is likely to be incorrect as patients whose levels peaked after hospital admission will have received supportive hospital care more rapidly (relative to time of peak concentration) than those who peaked before hospital admission. However, the extent of bias introduced by this assumption is unmeasurable.
To model the relationship between whole blood chloroquine concentrations and a fatal outcome we use a correction factor γ that accounts for the desethyl metabolite included in the assay measurement. Between 1 and 6 hours post ingestion, the desethyl metabolite will account for approximately 30% of the total concentration measured. We note that the values of γ and δ are not directly identifiable from the data, but we have good a priori estimates for δ [14] , and we use the data from the individuals who peaked after hospital admission to construct an informative prior distribution for γ.
The Bayesian posterior distribution over the model parameters used informative prior distributions for all four parameters. For the intercept term α, this was a normal distribution with mean -15 (e.g. 1 in 10 7 chance of dying at a whole blood concentration of 1µmol/L), and standard deviation 1; for the β coefficient on the log concentration, a normal distribution with mean 4 and standard deviation 1. The bias term δ was given an exponential prior with rate 7.8 (estimated from the 58 individuals who peaked after hospital admission). The metabolite correction factor γ was given a normal prior with mean 0.7 and standard deviation 0.065 (the standard deviation was estimated from chloroquine and metabolite measurements in 107 malaria patients from [19] ).
Uncertainty around the fit was reported as centred 95% credible intervals. The models were fit using stan [20] , implemented in R: 10 5 posterior samples were drawn from 7 independent chains, 4 . CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . the first half were discarded for burn-in and second half thinned every 140 samples. This resulted in 3500 posterior samples used to characterise the posterior concentration-response curve. Mixing was assessed by agreement between chains and traceplots. Comparison of prior and posterior distributions are given in supplementary Figure S2 . All code and data are openly available on github at:
https://github.com/jwatowatson/Chloroquine-concentration-fatality.
Each simulated pharmacokinetic profile was summarised by the peak concentration denoted C max . For each regimen and each weight category, we simulated 1,000 pharmacokinetic profiles. The set of C max values were then inputted into the pharmacodynamic model. We propagated uncertainty from the pharmacodynamic model by estimating desired quantities using for 3500 draws from the posterior distribution. For the estimation of the per thousand mortality under the different regimens, we truncated the concentration-dependent mortality prediction at 1% (this will vary depending on the draw from the posterior distribution). This is because estimating mortality ratios below 1%, given a sample size of a few hundred, will be highly dependent on the prior distribution chosen and the parametric form of the concentration-fatality curve. For example, the model predicts a mortality of the order of 1 per 100,000 at 2µmol/L ( Figure 1, bottom panel) . This is approximately the background rate of sudden unexplained death in a young adult population [21] , therefore rendering the prediction essentially unverifiable.
We pooled individual patient whole blood chloroquine + desethylchloroquine concentrations and outcomes from the largest prospectively studied hospital self-poisoning cohorts (n=258, Figure 1 , top panel) [7-9]. All the patients included in this analysis were treated in the same hospital in Paris and all had whole blood concentrations measured on admission. The overall mortality was 10% (26 out of 258). Of the patients with multiple concentration measurements (n = 167), 58 (35%) reached their peak concentration after admission. The other 109 were presumed to have reached peak concentrations before hospital admission. Bayesian logistic regression was used to estimate the relationship between mortality and whole blood peak chloroquine concentrations (Figure 1 , bottom panel). This specifically adjusted for the presence of the desethyl metabolite and for the non-observed peak concentrations in 200 (78%) of the patients. The whole blood chloroquine concentration associated with 1% mortality was 13µmol/L (95% CI, [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] . This is considered to be the lowest mortality for which a reliable estimate can be derived from the data. In the following, we use this threshold to evaluate the risk of fatal toxicity in chloroquine regimens under evaluation in COVID-19.
Using the two different chloroquine population pharmacokinetic models we simulated the range of expected concentration-time curves for the five potential COVID19 chloroquine treatment regimens and the malaria treatment regimen, for adults with weights ranging from 40 to 90kg. Each whole blood concentration-time curve was summarised by its peak concentration, denoted C max . The pharmacokinetic model estimated from whole blood concentrations [13] predicted a wider range of values for C max than the plasma based model (supplementary Figure S3 shows the predicted distributions for a 70 kg adult). Assuming a plasma to whole blood concentration ratio of 3, the whole blood based model also predicted higher median concentrations for all regimens. Assuming a plasma to whole blood ratio of 4 gave almost identical median C max values. The pharmacokinetic model fitted to whole blood concentrations provides higher estimates for fatal toxicity because it predicts a larger variance for the C max distribution and hence more extreme outliers. As a sensitivity analysis, the equivalent outputs for the plasma based model are shown in the supplementary materials ( Figures S4 & S5) . For a 70kg adult, the median C max following 600mg base equivalent given twice daily for ten days is 10.7µmol/L (Figure 2 ). This is more than 3 times higher than the median C max for the malaria treatment regimen at the same body weight. Approximately 60% of 70kg adults receiving the twice daily 600mg dose are in the 'danger zone' defined as concentrations above 10µmol/L. In comparison, only 2 in 1000 patients receiving the twice daily 310mg maintenance dose for ten days would reach concentrations above 10µmol/L. Taking into account the uncertainty around this threshold value, the model estimates that fewer than 1 per thousand receiving the twice daily 310mg dose would have peak concentrations above 5 . CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . 6 . CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . Figure 2 : The predicted risk of fatal toxicity across the six regimens simulated under the whole blood pharmacokinetic model. Panel A shows the simulated distribution of C max values in a 70kg adult for the five COVID19 treatment regimens and the malaria treatment regimen. The vertical red shaded area shows the 95% credible interval for the 1% mortality threshold concentration. Panel B shows the probability that an individual will cross the 1% mortality threshold value as a function of body weight for the different regimens (log 10 scale on the y-axis). Panel C shows the predicted mortality per thousand for the six regimens as a function of body weight. The equivalent output using the plasma pharmacokinetic model is given in supplementary Figure S5 . the 1% mortality threshold (Figure 2, panel B) . At most, 1 in a thousand 40kg adults receiving the 3 day malaria treatment regimen (unusually high mg/kg dose for malaria treatment) are predicted to reach peak concentrations above 10µmol/L. Coupling the pharmacokinetic model with the pharmacodynamic model, we estimated the expected weight-dependent fatality ratios for the five COVID19 chloroquine treatment regimens, truncating the concentration-fatality curve at the 1% mortality threshold (only taking into account concentrations going above this threshold, Figure 1, panel D) . Administering 600mg base equivalent of chloroquine phosphate twice daily for ten days as in the CloroCovid-19 trial is predicted to result in absolute mean fatality ratios ranging between 0.06% (90kg, 95% credible interval (C.I.), 0 to 0.3%) and 4.8% (40kg, 95% C.I. 1.9-9.%7). Only the flat dosing regimens are predicted to result in fatality rates greater than 1 per thousand and then only for weights less than 55kg: for a 40kg adult the 10 day regimen could result in 2 per thousand mortality (95% CI, 0.1-9). The 10 day flat regimen (without a loading dose) was recommended by the Health Commission of Guangdong Province for adults weighing more than 50 kg [18] . The model predictions suggest that reduced doses should be given at the lower end of the adult weight spectrum. 7 . CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.20078303 doi: medRxiv preprint
Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are already being used extensively, and often in high doses, to prevent and treat COVID19 despite the current lack of convincing evidence of benefit. The large randomised trials which should provide definitive evidence on treatment efficacy will not report for another few months, and prevention trials will take longer. Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have unusual pharmacokinetic properties with enormous total apparent volumes of distribution (V d ) (chloroquine>hydroxychloroquine) and very slow elimination (terminal half-lives exceed one month). Thus distribution processes rather than elimination govern the blood concentration profiles in the first days following the start of treatment. Large single doses are very dangerous because they result in high blood concentrations as the drugs distribute out from a central "compartment" that is hundreds of times smaller than the total V d (conventional compartmental modelling of chloroquine pharmacokinetics provides only an approximation of the distribution processes). These high concentrations cause potentially lethal cardiovascular and nervous system toxicity. There is concentration dependent electrocardiograph QRS widening and QT prolongation [14] . Death usually results from refractory hypotension or ventricular fibrillation. Self-poisoning with chloroquine provides an unfortunate opportunity to correlate drug exposure with the risk of iatrogenic death. The toxicokinetic-pharmacodynamic model developed here was based on the largest prospective series of chloroquine self-poisonings studied in a single referral centre. It was based on a majority of admission whole blood concentrations. The data from patients whose peak concentration occurred after hospital admission were used to approximate peak concentrations in the remaining patients. Overall, the admission concentrations were estimated to be approximately 5% lower on average than the peak concentrations. This corresponds to prior expectations: the mean interval to hospitalisation for this large self-poisoning cohort was 4.5 hours compared with an average time to peak concentration after oral administration of 3 hours (range 1-6 hours) [14] . This analysis does not make any prediction for hydroxychloroquine toxicity which is pharmacologically similar to chloroquine. The clinical features of hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine overdose are similar, although hydroxychloroquine is considered safer, with a wider therapeutic margin in experimental animals [22] . Unlike chloroquine, there are no large cohorts of hydroxychloroquine poisoning on which to base the PK-PD relationship. Thus, given available safety data, is very unlikely that equivalent hydroxychloroquine concentrations to chloroquine are more dangerous.
The high dose chloroquine regimen used by Borba et al [6] was justified on the basis of the recommendations by the Health Commission of Guangdong Province [18] but there may have been confusion between salt and base weights. The Chinese authorities recommended 500mg salt twice daily (two tablets of 250mg, comprising 155mg base each). This is the flat dose regimen we simulated (with an additional loading dose on day 1) which has an acceptable safety profile whereas the regimen trialled in Brazil [6] gave doses in base equivalent (which were almost twice those recommended by the Chinese authorities).
There are several limitations to this study. It is a retrospective individual patient data analysis. In the suicide attempts, other drugs or alcohol were often taken as well, although none with the acute lethal toxicity of chloroquine. The spectrophotometric assay method does not separate chloroquine from its desethylated metabolite, and is relatively insensitive. Desethychloroquine has generally similar biological properties, and the assay performs well at the high concentrations of relevance to this study. We corrected for the presence of the metabolite under the Bayesian model, but this correction increases uncertainty around the threshold concentration associated with 1% mortality.
Patients were managed by experienced intensivists on intensive care units where there was close clinical and laboratory monitoring. Mortality might be higher in less well supported settings, or overloaded hospitals in high-income settings. Hypokalaemia is an important manifestation of chloroquine poisoning and a contributor to tachyarrhythmias. With high dose regimens plasma potassium concentrations should be maintained over 4.0mmol/L and plasma magnesium concentrations over 0.8mmol/L. The predictions of absolute mortality under the regimens simulated in this work are sensitive to the parameterization of the pharmacokinetic model. C max is not usually directly observed but is a parameter estimated from data. There are no large population pharmacokinetic studies on which to verify the precision of the C max predictions, especially for the tails of the distribution.
COVID19 ranges from very mild illness to severe disease necessitating intensive care. Case fatality ratios are highly age dependent [23] . The potential toxicity of a treatment regimen has 8 . CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . to be balanced against the severity of illness. If chloroquine is to benefit patients with COVID19 it is likely to require high exposures. However, chloroquine concentrations over 20µmol/L are associated with more than 5% mortality. Understanding the concentration-dependent toxicity of chloroquine is essential in determining the risk-benefit trade-off in COVID-19 clinical trials. Treatment regimens for hospitalised COVID19 patients which result in whole blood chloroquine concentrations below 10µmol/L for more than 95% of patients have an acceptable safety margin.
All the authors declare no conflicts of interest
The Mahidol Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit is funded by the Wellcome Trust. NJW has a senior Wellcome Trust fellowship. JT is also funded the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation No specific funding was received for this work.
. CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.20078303 doi: medRxiv preprint Figure S1 : Comparing the concentration fatality-curves obtained when using only the retrospectively gathered data (blue dashed line, n = 91 [7]) or only the prospectively gathered data (black solid line, n = 258 [7-9]). The parameters of the logistic regression correspond to maximum likelihood estimates.
12 . CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . Figure S2 : Comparison between prior distributions (thick red lines) and posterior distributions (shown as histograms) for the four parameters of the model. α intercept term; β: log-concentration coefficient; δ: bias term for patients whose peak concentration was not observed; γ: fraction of concentration that is due to chloroquine and not the metabolite. This shows that the data are informative with respect to the β coefficient on the log concentration. This is the desired behaviour given we know that chloroquine at low doses is very safe. See the meta-analysis of the related bisquinoline compound piperaquine showing that under normal dosing, the mortality is unlikely to be greater than the background mortality rate [21] .
. CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.20078303 doi: medRxiv preprint Figure S3 : Predicted C max distributions for a 70 kg adult for the plasma PK model (black) and the whole blood PK model (red) under the 6 different regimens. The predicted plasma concentrations are scaled by 3 to produce approximate whole blood concentrations. The areas under all the curves are equal to 1, with the all y-axes given the same height in order to highlight differences in width of predicted distributions.
14 . CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.20078303 doi: medRxiv preprint Figure S4 : Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic model of chloroquine induced mortality. Top: pooled whole blood chloroquine + desethylchloroquine concentrations from admission samples in prospectively studied self-poisoning patients [7] [8] [9] . The data are shown as overlapping histograms for survivors (blue, n = 232) and non-survivors (red, n = 26). The overlapping areas are shown by the intermediate burgundy colour. Bottom: Bayesian posterior distribution over the concentration-response curve (mean and 95% credible interval) between admission whole blood chloroquine concentrations and death, shown on the log-log 10 scale. The horizontal dashed lines show the upper 99 percentiles under the plasma pharmacokinetic model for the six regimens considered in a 70kg adult. The vertical red shaded area shows the posterior credible interval over the concentrations associated with 1% mortality. The equivalent output with the whole blood pharmacokinetic model is shown as Figure 1 in the main text.
. CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . Figure S5 : The predicted risk of fatal toxicity across the six regimens simulated under the plasma pharmacokinetic model. Panel A shows the simulated distribution of C max values in a 65kg adult for the four regimens considered. The vertical red shaded area shows the 95% credible interval for the 1% mortality threshold concentration. Panel B shows the probability that an individual will cross the 1% mortality threshold value as a function of body weight for the different regimens (log 10 scale on the y-axis). Panel C shows the predicted mortality per thousand for the six regimens as a function of body weight.
. CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.20078303 doi: medRxiv preprint
