SARS-CoV-2 enters cells using its Spike protein, which is also the main target of neutralizing antibodies. Therefore, assays to measure how antibodies and sera affect Spikemediated viral infection are important for studying immunity. Because SARS-CoV-2 is a biosafetylevel-3 virus, one way to simplify such assays is to pseudotype biosafety-level-2 viral particles with Spike. Such pseudotyping has now been described for single-cycle lentiviral, retroviral and VSV particles, but the reagents and protocols are not widely available. Here we detail how to effectively pseudotype lentiviral particles with SARS-CoV-2 Spike and infect 293T cells engineered to express the SARS-CoV-2 receptor, ACE2. We also make all the key experimental reagents available in the BEI Resources repository of ATCC and the NIH. Furthermore, we demonstrate how these pseudotyped lentiviral particles can be used to measure the neutralizing activity of human sera or plasma against SARS-CoV-2 in convenient luciferase-based assays, thereby providing a valuable complement to ELISA-based methods that measure antibody binding rather than neutralization.
But while there are now well-characterized and high-throughput methods (such as ELISA assays) to measure total antibody binding to SARS-CoV-2 or some of its key constituent proteins [2, 6, 26] , quantifying neutralizing antibody activity is more difficult. The most biologically relevant method is to directly measure how antibodies or sera inhibit infection of cells by replicationcompetent SARS-CoV-2. Such live-virus assays have now been performed to quantify neutralizing activity in the sera of infected patients or characterize the potency of individual antibodies [1, 6, 12, 27] . However, the throughput and accessibility of live-virus neutralization assays with SARS-CoV-2 is limited by the fact that the virus is a biosafety-level-3 agent that must be worked with in specialized facilities.
An alternative approach that alleviates these biosafety limitations leverages the fact that all known neutralizing antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 (and other coronaviruses that lack an HE protein) target the virus's Spike protein [1, 12, 27] . Spike protrudes prominently from the surface of SARS-CoV-2 virions, and is necessary and sufficient to enable the virus to bind and enter cells [28] . Spike from several coronaviruses can be "pseudotyped" onto safer non-replicative viral particles in place of their endogenous entry protein, thereby making entry of these particles into cells dependent on Spike [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] . For SARS-CoV-2, such pseudotyping has recently been reported using HIV-based lentiviral particles [4, 27, 37] , MLV-based retroviral particles [12, 38] , and VSV [29, [39] [40] [41] . In the data reported to date, results from such pseudovirus neutralization assays correlate well with measurements made using live SARS-CoV-2 [1, 12, 27, 39] . However, the detailed protocols and reagents to perform such assays are not yet widely available to the scientific community.
Here we fill this gap by providing a detailed description of how to pseudotype lentiviral particles with Spike. We explain how these pseudotyped particles can be used to conveniently measure Spikemediated cell entry via fluorescent or luciferase reporters, and to quantify the neutralizing activity of human plasma. Finally, we describe all the necessary experimental reagents and make them available in the BEI Resources reagent repository (https://www.beiresources.org/).
The basic strategy for pseudotyping HIV-1-derived lentiviral particles is shown in Figure 1A . It involves transfecting 293T cells with a lentiviral backbone plasmid encoding a fluorescent or luminescent reporter protein, a plasmid expressing Spike, and plasmids expressing the minimal set of lentiviral proteins necessary to assemble viral particles. The transfected cells then produce Spikepseudotyped lentiviral particles that can be used to infect permissive cells that express the SARS-CoV-2 receptor protein, ACE2 [28, 29, 41, 42] .
We used an HIV-based lentiviral system to produce viral particles pseudotyped with Spike. As shown in Figure 1A , his system requires co-transfecting cells with a lentiviral backbone encoding the reporter protein(s), a plasmid expessing Spike, and plasmids encoding the other HIV proteins necessary for virion formation (Tat, Gag-Pol, and Rev). We used two different lentiviral backbones: one that uses a CMV promoter to drive expression of just ZsGreen, and another that uses a CMV promoter to drive exprssion of luciferase followed by an internal ribosome entry site (IRES) and ZsGreen (hereafter referred to as the ZsGreen and Luciferase-IRES-ZsGreen backbones). The transfected cells produce lentiviral particles with Spike on their surface. These viral particles can infect cells that express the ACE2 receptor. (B) We used three variants of Spike: the codon-optimized Spike from SARS-CoV-2 strain Wuhan-Hu-1, a variant containing mutations K1269A and H1271A in the cytoplasmic tail (such that the C-terminal five amino acids are ALAYT), and a variant in which the cytoplasmic tail of Spike has been replaced with that from influenza hemagglutinin (HA). (C) Spike expression on the surface of 293T cells transfected with the plasmids expressing our three Spike constructs was measured using flow cytometry 24 hours post-transfection. Spike expression was measured by staining with in-house produced CR3022 antibody [43] [44] [45] at a concentration of 10 µg/mL followed by staining with an anti-human Fc antibody conjugated to APC (Jackson Labs, 109-135-098) at a 1:100 dilution.
The Spike protein was from SARS-CoV-2 strain Wuhan-Hu-1 using the NCBI-annotated start site [46] , with the nucleotide sequence codon optimized for expression in human cells. We used three variants of Spike ( Figure 1B) . The first variant was simply the codon-optimized Spike. The second variant had two amino-acid mutations to basic residues in Spike's cytoplasmic tail (K1269A and H1271A) that change the sequence of the five most C-terminal residues to ALAYT. This variant is hereafter referred to as Spike-ALAYT. The rationale for Spike-ALAYT was that for the original SARS-CoV, the two analagous mutations were shown to improve plasma-membrane expression of Spike by eliminating an endoplasmic reticulum retention signal [47, 48] . The third variant had the cytoplasmic tail of Spike replaced with that from influenza hemagglutinin (HA); this variant is hereafter referred to as Spike-HAtail. The rationale for Spike-HAtail was that for the original SARS-CoV, deleting Spike's cytoplasmic tail or replacing it with that from other viruses was shown to improve pseudotyping efficiency [30, [49] [50] [51] . We validated that there was expression of Spike on the surface of 293T cells transfected with plasmids expressing each of these three variants ( Figure 1C ). The sequences of all of the Spike and lentiviral plasmids are in File S1, and the plasmids are available from BEI Resources (see Materials and Methods for BEI catalog numbers).
To create a target cell line that is efficiently infected by the SARS-CoV-2 Spike-pseudotyped lentiviral particles, we transduced 293T cells with a lentiviral vector expressing human ACE2 under an EF1a promoter (lentiviral backbone plasmid sequence is in File S1, and is available from BEI Resources as item NR-52512). To create a clonal cell line from the bulk transduction, we sorted single transduced cells by flow cytometry and re-expanded into large populations (note that there is not a selectable marker in these cells). We identified an expanded clone that expressed high levels of ACE2 ( Figure  2A ). This ACE2 expression appears stable overtime and has not noticeably decreased through twelve passages at the time of writing. This clone is hereafter referred to as 293T-ACE2, and is available from BEI Resources as item NR-52511. For each viral entry protein, 293T and 293T-ACE2 cells were incubated with equal volumes of virus. Cells were incubated with 1/20 th the volume of VSV G-pseudotyped lentivirus compared to Spikepseudotyped lentivirus. The decrease in infected cells for the Spike-HAtail virus compared to the other Spike-pseudotyped lentiviruses is consistent with this virus having somewhat lower titers (see Fig. 2A ).
We validated that the 293T-ACE2 cells were susceptible to infection by SARS-CoV-2 Spikepseudotyped lentiviral particles by incubating 293T-ACE2 and parental 293T with equivalent amounts of viral particles carrying ZsGreen. As shown in Figure 2B , all Spike-pseudotyped viruses can infect the 293T-ACE2 but not the 293T cells. Virus pseudotyped with VSV G, an amphotropic viral entry protein that is not dependent on ACE2, efficiently infects both cell lines ( Figure 2B ).
To quantify the titers of lentiviral particles pseudotyped with each of the Spike variants, we produced particles with each of these Spikes, as well as a positive control using VSV G and a negative control without a viral entry protein. We first produced viral particles using the ZsGreen backbone, and titered by flow cytometry to determine the number of transducing particles per ml. As shown in Figure 3A , all Spike variants produced titers »10 4 transduction units per ml. These titers were about two orders of magnitude lower than those achieved with VSV G, but we considered them to be encouragingly high given that lentiviral particles can be further concentrated by a variety of methods [52, 53] . We then produced viral particles using the Luciferase-IRES-ZsGreen backbone, and found . CC-BY 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.20.051219 doi: bioRxiv preprint that we could achieve titers of >10 6 relative luciferase units (RLUs) per ml in 96-well plate infections ( Figure 1B) . This titer was again about two orders of magnitude lower than that achieved using VSV G. As expected, the magnitude of the fluorescent signal from ZsGreen is lower for the Luciferase-IRES-ZsGreen backbone than for the ZsGreen-only backbone (Figure 1C) , since the ZsGreen in the former construct is driven by an IRES rather than the primary promoter. As can be seen from the images, the ZsGreen backbone gives a stronger fluorescent signal than the Luciferase-IRES-ZsGreen backbone, presumably because this protein is expressed more strongly as the sole CMV-promoter driven transcript than as the second transcript driven by an IRES.
We next used the Luciferase-IRES-ZsGreen viruses to perform neutralization assays in 96-well plates. Because <10 5 RLUs per well of a 96-well plate are necessary to achieve a signal >1,000-fold above the background luciferase activity of virus-only controls, this assay requires only a relatively modest volume of virus is for a full 96-well plate neutralization assay.
We performed neutralization assays using plasma from a confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infected patient collected at 19 days post-symptom onset, and with soluble ACE2 protein fused to an IgG Fc domain (which neutralizes SARS-CoV-2 by acting as a decoy receptor [54] ). As negative controls (not expected to neutralized) we used sera collected prior to the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 in late 2019.
Bright Field Fluorescence C . CC-BY 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.20.051219 doi: bioRxiv preprint For these assays, we first made serial dilutions of the plasma, sera, or soluble ACE2-Fc in a 96-well plate. We then incubated these dilutions for 60 minutes with a volume of pseudotyped lentiviral particles sufficient to achieve 2x10 5 RLUs of luciferase signal per well. Finally, we added the mix to a pre-seeded plate of 293T-ACE2 cells. We measured the luciferase signal at 60 hours post-infection (see Materials and Methods for a more detailed protocol). Both the plasma from the confirmed SARS-CoV-2-infected patient and the soluble ACE2-Fc effectively neutralized the virus (Figure 4A,B) . For the plasma, the inhibitory concentrations 50% (IC50s) were »1:1600 (± 25%) for all three Spike variants, which is in the range of values that have been reported for sera and plasma from other SARS-CoV-2 patients at a similar time post-infection [4] . For soluble ACE2-Fc, the IC50 was »2 µg/mL with the Spike and Spike-ALAYT-pseudotyped lentiviral particles, but was notably lower for the Spike-HAtail pseudotyped lentiviral particles ( Figure 4B ). Our measurement of »2 µg/mL for the unmodified Spike is higher than a previously reported IC50 of 0.1 µg/ml for soluble ACE2-IgG [54] . We suspect that the difference could be because our 293T-ACE2 target cells express high levels of ACE2 making them more resistant to neutralization by soluble ACE2. As expected, there was no neutralization of the pseudotyped virus by either pooled or individual human sera collected at dates prior to the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 ( Figure 4C) .
Our results are equivocal as to whether the cytoplasmic tail modifications greatly alter neutralization sensitivity. For the plasma neutralization, all three Spike variants (Spike, Spike-ALAYT, and Spike-HAtail) exhibited similar neutralization profiles (Figure 4A) . But for the soluble ACE2, the Spike-HAtail virus was notably more neutralization sensitive than the other two Spike variants ( Figure 4B) . While the mechanism underlying the distinct neutralization sensitivity observed is unclear, it is possible that modifying the Spike's cytoplasmic tail may alter opening of the receptor-. CC-BY 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.20.051219 doi: bioRxiv preprint binding domains [28] . Therefore, we suggest performing the assays using the Spike without any cytoplasmic tail modifications, particularly since none of the modifications tested here greatly improved pseudotyped lentiviral particle titers.
We describe a detailed protocol for producing SARS-CoV-2 Spike-pseudotyped lentiviral particles and performing neutralization assays. Although this basic pseudotyping approach has been described previously [4, 12, 27, 29, [37] [38] [39] [40] [41] , we provide the first detailed protocol that makes all reagents available in a public repository (https://www.beiresources.org/). We hope this protocol and reagents will more easily enable others to assess the neutralizing activity of antibodies and sera reactive to SARS-CoV-2.
We also found that modifying the cytoplasmic tail of SARS-CoV-2 Spike did not greatly improve titers of Spike-pseudotyped lentiviral particles. Indeed, one cytoplasmic tail modification we tested potentially altered the neutralization sensitivity of the pseudotyped lentiviral particles, suggesting it may be undesirable. While we did not test the full suite of cytoplasmic tail modifications that have been used for pseudotyping with Spike from the original SARS-CoV [30, [49] [50] [51] , our results suggest that modifications to the cytoplasmic tail of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike should be tested with caution.
Overall, we have described an easily accessible assay to study neutralizing antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2 in a biosafety-level-2 laboratory. This assay allows human sera or plasma samples to be screened in a convenient 96-well format, which will help facilitate the testing of large numbers of patient samples to better understand the development of immunity and to potentially screen donors for passive transfer of convalescent plasma [25, 55] .
The sequences of all plasmids used in this study are available in Genbank format in File S1 and are also at https://github.com/jbloomlab/SARS-CoV-2_lentiviral_pseudotype/tree/master/plasmid_maps. The plasmids themselves are available in BEI Resources (https://www.beiresources.org/) with the following catalog numbers:
• pHAGE2-EF1aInt-ACE2-WT (BEI catalog number NR52512): lentiviral backbone plasmid expressing the human ACE2 gene (GenBank ID for human ACE2 is NM_021804) under an EF1a promoter with an intron to increase expression. pHAGE2-CMV-ZsGreen-W (NR-52520): lentiviral backbone plasmid that uses a CMV promoter to express ZsGreen. Note that all of these plasmids have ampicillin resistance. The only plasmid used in this study that is not in the BEI Resources catalog is the HDM-VSVG plasmid that expresses VSV G under a CMV promoter, and was used . CC-BY 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.20.051219 doi: bioRxiv preprint to create the positive control lentivirus pseudotyped with VSV G. However, numerous VSV G expressing plasmids are available from AddGene and other repositories.
VSV G-pseudotyped lentivirus packaging the human ACE2 was generated via co-transfecting 293T cells (ATCC, CRL-3216) with the pHAGE2-EF1aInt-ACE2-WT plasmid (File S1) and lentiviral helper plasmids (HDM-VSVG, HDM-Hgpm2, HDM-tat1b, and pRC-CMV-Rev1b). The resulting lentivirus was used to infect more 293T cells in the presence of 5 ug/mL polybrene. The transduced cells were stained with anti-human ACE-2 polyclonal goat IgG (AF933, R&D Systems) primary antibody at 1 ug/mL and donkey anti-goat IgG conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 (ab150129, Abcam) secondary antibody at a 1:2500 dilution and sorted based on antibody staining. Once single cell clones had grown sufficiently, they were screened for ACE2 expression via flow cytometry and a clone with high expression was expanded and named 293T-ACE2 (Figure 2A) . For verifying expression via flow cytometry, cells were harvested with enzyme-free dissociation buffer (ThermoFisher, 13151014) and stained with anti-human ACE-2 polyclonal goat IgG primary antibody at 2 ug/mL and donkey anti-goat IgG (Alexa Fluor 488) secondary antibody at a 1:1000 dilution. For each staining step, cells were incubated with antibody in the dark at 4 C for 30 min. Cells were washed 3 times with 3% BSA in PBS following each stain.
The 293T-ACE2 cells can be grown in D10 growth media (DMEM with 10% heat-inactivated FBS, 2 mM Lglutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 ug/ml streptomycin) at 37 C and 5% carbon dioxide. Note that there is not a selectable marker for the ACE2 expression. The 293T-ACE2 cells are available from BEI Resources as catalog number NR-52511.
Pseudotyped lentiviruses can be generated by transfecting 293Ts as depicted in Figure 1A . We used the following protocol:
1. Seed 293T cells in D10 growth media (see subsection 4.2 for media composition) so that they will be 50-70% confluent the next day. For a 6-well plate, this is 5x10 5 cells per well (2.5x10 5 cells per mL). 2. At 16-24 hours after seeding, transfect the cells with the plasmids required for lentiviral production.
We transfect using BioT (Bioland Scientific) following the manufacturer's instructions and using the following plasmid mix per well of a 6-well plate (plasmid amounts should be adjusted for larger plates): it through a 0.45 um filter. Virus can be stored at 4 C for immediate use or frozen at -80 C. The titers of Spike-and VSV G-pseudotyped lentiviruses were found to be unaffected by a freeze-thaw cycle (data not shown). All titers presented here are from virus that was frozen at -80 C prior to use.
To determine viral titers, we used either flow cytometry (for viruses packaging the ZsGreen backbone) or a luciferase assay (for viruses packaging the Luciferase-IRES-ZsGreen backbone). A detailed titering protocol is described below and differences between these two readouts are noted: Only" and "Virus + 293Ts" wells provides the background signal. The "Virus + Cells" wells represent maximum infection without any serum and provide a metric for 100% virus infectivity. Note that "cells" here refers to the 293T-ACE2 cells.
. CC-BY 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.20.051219 doi: bioRxiv preprint
The following protocol was developed to streamline neutralization assays with Spike-pseudotyped lentiviruses. This protocol can be performed with either human sera or plasma, or monoclonal antibodies. Note that for safety, sera or plasma should be heat-inactivated in a biosafety cabinet prior to use as described in subsection 4.6.
1. Seed a poly-L-lysine-coated 96-well plate with 1.25x10 4 293T-ACE2 cells (BEI NR-52511) per well in 50 uL DMEM (2.5x10 5 cells per mL). Plan to infect this plate 8-12 hours post-seeding.
2. About 1.5 hours prior to infecting cells, begin preparing serum and/or ACE2 dilutions in D10:
a. In a separate 96-well "setup" plate, serially dilute serum samples leaving 60 uL diluted serum in each well. For the data in Figures 4A & 4C , we started at an initial serum dilution of 1:80 and did serial 2.5-fold dilutions, meaning each replicate of the assay requires 5 uL of sera. For ACE2 (Fig. 4) we started with a concentration of 200 ug/mL and did serial 3-fold dilutions.
b. Add 60 uL of D10 to wells corresponding to virus only and virus plus cells control wells. Add 120 uL of D10 to media only and cells only control wells. See Figure 5 for an example plate layout.
3. Dilute virus to ~2-4x10 6 RLU per mL. Add 60 uL of diluted virus to all wells containing serum dilutions and the virus only and virus plus cells control wells. 4 . Incubate virus and serum at 37 C for 1 hr.
Carefully add 100 uL from each well of the setup plate containing the sera and virus dilutions to the corresponding wells of the plate of 293T-ACE2 cells.
6. Add polybrene (Sigma Aldrich, TR-1003-G) as described in subsection 4.4 for a final concentration of 5 ug/mL in each well.
7. Incubate at 37 C for 48-60 hours before reading out luminescence or fluorescence as described in subsection 4.4.
8. Plot the data. For the curves shown in Figure 4 , we fit and plotted the data using the neutcurve Python package (https://jbloomlab.github.io/neutcurve/).
The human plasma sample used in Figure 4A was collected at 19 days post-symptom onset from a patient with a confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection. Prior to use, the plasma was heat-inactivated in a biosafety cabinet at 56 C for one hour. This duration of heat treatment has been shown to be sufficient to inactivate SARS-CoV-2 [26, 57] , which is also not reported to be present at high titers in the blood [58, 59] . The negative control serum pools came from Gemini Biosciences (Cat:100-110). The naïve serum pool collected in 2017-2018 is lot H86W03J. The agematched negative control serum comes from serum residuals collected by Bloodworks Northwest. It was collected on 12/19/1989 and stored at -80 C. Soluble human ACE2 protein fused to the Fc region of human IgG was produced as described in [28] . This ACE2-Fc fusion protein was used in Figure 4B .
Supplementary Materials: File S1: A zip file containing all the plasmid maps in Genbank format. 
