Background. Medical editorials have suggested that angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) should not be given to people with arterial hypertension during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic because of a potential increased risk of worse clinical outcomes and that calcium channel blockers (CCBs) should be used as an alternative. Methods Using a cohort of 610 COVID-19 cases and 48,667 population-based controls from Zheijang, China we have tested the role of usage of ACEIs, ARBs, CCBs and other medications on risk and severity of COVID 19. Analyses were adjusted for age, sex and BMI and for presence of relevant comorbidities. Findings: Higher BMI, diabetes and cardio/ cerebrovascular disease are independent risk factors for the development of COVID-19. Individuals with hypertension taking CCBs had significantly increased risk [odds ratio (OR)= 1.67 (95% CI 1.2-2.9)) of manifesting symptoms of COVID-19 whereas those taking ARBs and diuretics had significantly lower disease risk (OR=0.24; 95%CI 0.17-0.34 and OR=0.32; 95%CI 0.19-0.57 respectively). Other antihypertensive drugs were not associated with increased .
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by a new zoonotic coronary virus, SARS CoV2, has affected over 2.4 million people and caused 162,000 deaths across the world as of 19 April 2020 1 having a profound impact on health services and public health. The clinical spectrum of SARS-CoV-2 infection appears to be wide, encompassing asymptomatic infection in 1%, mild upper respiratory tract illness with fever, fatigue, cough with or without sputum production in 81%, to more severe viral pneumonia in 14% with ground-glass opacity computed tomography of the chest leading to critical illness in 5% associated with respiratory failure, septic shock and/ or multi-organ failure. 2 Case-fatality rate ranges from 0.4% to 2.9% between different regions. 2 Large descriptive studies have reported type 2 diabetes in 7.4% -9.6% of patients with COVID-19 and hypertension in 15% as two of the most prevalent co-morbid conditions. 3, 4, 5 Moreover, diabetes (16.2%) and hypertension (23.7%) are highly prevalent among those with severe manifestations. 3 Of patients admitted to intensive care unit, 22% of those who died had diabetes. 6 None of these studies assessed the effect of antihypertensive or antidiabetic medications on COVID-19.
SARS CoV2 virus binds angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2); 7, 8 in humans, ACE2 is expressed broadly including epithelial cells of the lung, intestine, kidney, heart and blood vessels. 9 The virus downregulates the ACE2 protein expression in a replication dependent manner 10 resulting in loss of ACE2 function. Whether variation in ACE2 expression contributes to the virulence in the current pandemic of COVID-19 is still unclear. There is an ongoing debate as to whether and how the interaction between the virus, hypertension and ACE2 may influence the manifestations of COVID- 19. 11,12,13 Concerns have been raised that angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 24.20077875 doi: medRxiv preprint (ACEIs), angiotensin II type 1 receptor blockers (ARBs) and thiozolidinediones often prescribed in patients with diabetes, hypertension and cardiac disease may increase the risk of COVID-19 and its clinical outcomes. 11, 12, 14 In contrast, ACE2 is a counter regulatory enzyme that degrades angiotensin II, hence, reducing its effect on vasoconstriction, sodium retention and fibrosis. Therefore, trials of losartan as a treatment for Covid-19 are underway enrolling patients who have not previously received treatment with ACEIs or ARBs. 15 We have investigated whether any of the antihypertensive and antidiabetic medications affected either the development and/ or severity of COVID-19 using a multi-center cohort of 610 patients with COVID-19 and 48,667 population-based control subjects from Zhejiang province, China.
The study protocol conformed to the ethical guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki. The local ethics committees of all hospitals approved the retrospective study of cohorts COVID-19. The requirement for written consent was waived due to the retrospective and anonymous nature of this study.
Consecutive patients presenting to 14 hospitals in Zhejiang province, China between Jan 10 and Feb 28, 2020 and confirmed diagnosis of Covid-19 infection were included CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 24.20077875 doi: medRxiv preprint transcriptase-polymerase-chain-reaction (RT-PCR) assay of nasal and pharyngeal swab specimens. Only laboratory-confirmed cases were included in the study. The clinical data of all patients were collected from the electronic medical records. All patients were administered with antiviral and supportive treatment, and prevention of complications based on their clinical condition.
The severity of the disease was classified into 4 categories according to the Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Treatment of New Coronavirus Pneumonia (fifth edition) 16 : 1) mild type: patients with mild clinical symptoms and no pulmonary changes on CT imaging, 2) common type: patients with symptoms of fever and signs of respiratory infection, and having pneumonia changes on CT imaging, 3) severe type: patients presenting with any one item of the following: (a) respiratory distress, respiratory rate ≥ 30/min, (b) oxygen saturation of finger ≤ 93% in resting condition, and (c) arterial partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) /oxygen concentration (FiO2) ≤ 300 mmHg (1 mmHg = 0.133 kPa) or 4) critical type: patients meeting any one of the following criteria: (a) respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation, (b) shock and (c) requiring ICU admission requirement due to multiple organ failure.
Detailed methods and data sources used to establish an EHR-based general population-based cohort study in an eastern coastal area of China has been described previously. 17 The control group used in the current study is from the general population from Gulin town, a suburban area of Ningbo City, Zhejiang province, China. Since 2004, all citizens are offered regular health screening in Gulin Health Center. Detailed medical history is recorded in Electronic Medical Record System. Gulin town was . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. to facilitate routine primary care services for local general practitioners (GPs). Since 2009, this regional system has covered nearly all health-related activities of residents within this region, from birth to death, including children, adolescents, pregnant women, adults and elderly people. Now 98% of permanent residents are covered by the national health insurance and have registered in the health information system with a valid healthcare identifier.
. CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 24.20077875 doi: medRxiv preprint All the chronic diseases diagnosed by doctors in Gulin or outside Gulin will be reported to Ningbo CDC and rechecked by department of chronic disease management of Gulin hospital. All the prescription medicines of chronic diseases listed above are recorded and regularly verified.
Categorical variables were expressed as frequency and percentages. Continuous variables were expressed as mean and standard deviations. Logistic regressions were carried out either unadjusted or adjusting for covariates as indicated in the table legends. P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.
The selection of the study population is illustrated in Figure 1 . A total of 610 COVID-19 patients were enrolled after admission from various centers in the Zheijiang province (Figure 1) . A population-based cohort from the Zhejiang province consisting of 48,667 adults with health records was used as controls. The descriptive characteristics, comorbidities and use of medication available in both cases and controls were compared ( Table 1) . We find that, prevalence of type 2 diabetes, higher BMI, presence of cardiovascular or cerebrovascular disease were associated with (all increased in) the covid-19 patients ( Table 1) . We then adjusted all factors for age, sex and BMI. In the case of antihypertensives we further adjusted for hypertension, in the case of medication used to treat diabetes we adjusted for presence of T2D.
All the disease conditions associated with COVID-19 remain statistically significantly associated after adjustment for age, sex and BMI. There was no significant difference in the use of immunosuppressant medication (glucocorticoids) between COVID-19 and . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . the population-based controls and a significantly higher use of statins among COVID-
We found that among individuals with a diagnosis of hypertension there was no difference in the use of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors or beta-blockers, but individuals with COVID-19 were significantly more likely to be on calcium channel blockers (CCBs) and less likely to be on diuretics and on angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs).
We also find that after adjustment for demographics and presence of T2D the use of antidiabetic medications is significantly different in T2D patients with COVID-19 than in those without and this is particularly striking for use of glycosidase inhibitors which are significantly less prevalent among T2D individuals infected with COVID-19, and insulin and DPP-4 inhibitors which are much more likely to be used by T2D people with COVID-19. (Table 1) We compared these figures graphically between controls and different severity categories in Figure 2 . We see that although hypertension in itself is not more prevalent in COVID-19 diagnosed individuals than controls, it is much more prevalent in severe and critical cases (Table 2, Figure 2A ). Type 2 diabetes, male sex, and age over 65 all show a similar pattern in terms of increase prevalence with severity. ( Table   2 , Figure 2A )
With regards to antidiabetic medications after adjusting for age, sex, BMI and diabetes, glucosidase inhibitors are less prevalent among T2D affected individuals symptomatic for COVID-19 and DPP-inhibitors and insulin are much more prevalent among COVID-19 patients. We compared these values to those in COVID-19 severity categories ( Figure 2B and Table 3 ) and we find that there is no significant association between use of DPP-inhibitors and COVID-19 severity after adjustment for age, sex and BMI, . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . resulting in OR=0.20 (95%CI 0.02 -1.98; P=0.17). For insulin, we observed a trend for higher use among the more severe cases with OR=2.96 (95%CI 0.81-10.76 P=0.10) which however did not achieve statistical significance ( Table 3) .
We carried out a similar analysis with antihypertensive medications. We find that comparing population-based controls to COVID-19 diagnosed individuals that use of ARBs and diuretics was significantly less prevalent in COVID-19 cases with hypertension than among hypertensive controls, whilst use of CCBs was significantly more prevalent among COVID-19 cases than controls after adjustment for age, sex and BMI ( Table 1) . No significant difference in susceptibility or severity was seen with use of ACE inhibitors. (Figure 2C , Table 3 ). In terms of severity, there was a trend for use of beta-blockers to be more prevalent in severe and critical cases than in mild and common cases. However, after adjustment for age, sex and BMI none of the antihypertensive medications was significantly associated with COVID-19 severity.
( Figure 2C , Table 3 )
The only type of medications which remain associated with COVID-19 severity after adjustment for age, sex and BMI are immunosuppressive drugs (glucocorticoids) with an OR =7.45 (95%CI 1.12-48.3; Table 3 )
Recent descriptive cohort studies have reported type 2 diabetes in 7.4% -9.6% of patients with COVID-19 and hypertension in 15% as two of the most prevalent chronic health conditions. [3] [4] [5] 18 Using a case-control design involving 610 patients with COVID-19 and a well-characterized 48,667 population-based controls from the South-east region of China, we have identified higher BMI, diabetes and cardio/ cerebrovascular disease as independent risk factors for the development of COVID-19. We found the . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 24.20077875 doi: medRxiv preprint prevalence of hypertension to be slightly higher among patients (22.5%), but this was not statistically significant compared to its prevalence of 20.3% in the population-based control group. Furthermore, age (>65 years), sex (male) and BMI were associated with the development of severe disease in 128 out of 610 of those with COVID-19. In addition, when adjusted for age, sex and BMI, those with history of hypertension have over two-fold risk of developing severe form of COVID-19.
The analysis of medications acting on renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system demonstrates that patients with COVID-19 were significantly less likely compared to population-based controls to be taking ARBs (8.7% vs 15.4%) and diuretics in (2.1% vs 5.1%) prior to their presentation, after adjusting for covariates such as age, sex and BMI) as well as presence of hypertension. In contrast, CCBs were associated with increased risk of COVID-19. Although hypertension is clearly a risk factor for severity, is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . type 1 receptor. 14, 15 Concerns regarding both ACEI and ARBs have led to calls for discontinuation of these drugs both prophylactically and in those with suspected COVID-19. 15 In contrast, using a large longitudinal population-based control group and a multi-centre cohort of COVID-19 cases, we have demonstrated that those on ARBs are significantly less likely (OR: 0.24 [95% CI 0.17-0.34]) to develop COVID-19.
Potential benefit from ARBs in this context may be related to the effect of SARS-CoV-2 which once gaining entry through ACE2 into type II pneumocyte downregulates ACE2 leading to unabated angiotensin II induced organ injury. In a mouse model, SARS-CoV-1 induced lung injury could be limited by renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system blockade. 23 Our analysis hasn't shown ACEIs to have an effect similar to ARBs, consistent with the observations that ACEIs currently in clinical use do not directly affect ACE2 activity. 24 We are not aware of any population based case-control studies thus far investigating risk factors increasing susceptibility to COVID-19, however, a systematic review 25 found that ACEIs reduced the risk of pneumonia. In the latter study, the benefits of ACEI were substantially greater among Asian patients and these were attributed to a higher prevalence of ACE polymorphisms increasing the ACEI levels and kinin catabolism in this ethnic group.
Of 610 with COVID-19, 128 developed severe or critical form of the disease, higher proportion of patients (42.9%) with mild/ common form of the disease were on ARBs compared to severe (36.8%) and critical (31.6%) form of the disease. However, neither ARBs nor ACEI were significantly associated with the severity of COVID-19. Recently, a retrospective cohort study from Wuhan province, demonstrated lower (3.7%) 28-day all-cause mortality among 188 patients with COVID-19 receiving ARBs or ACEI inhospital compared 9.8% among those who weren't receiving these drugs. 26 That study . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.20077875 doi: medRxiv preprint was not powered to evaluate the effect of ACEIs vs ARBs. In addition, lower proportion of patients with COVID-19 overall were on ARBs or ACEIs than expected 27,28 raising the possibility that concerns regarding these drugs at the beginning of the epidemic may have resulted in change in medication in patients on admission, In-hospital use of ACEI has previously been shown to be associated with lower rate of ventilation and inhospital mortality with viral pneumonias. 29 Our case-control analysis showed that those taking CCBs had significantly increased risk [OR 1.67 (95% CI 1.2-2.9)] of manifesting symptoms of COVID-19. In addition, patients on beta-blockers were more likely to develop severe (13.2%) and critical form (21.1%) compared to mild/ common form (6.6%) of the disease but this last analysis was not significant after adjusting for age sex and BMI. The mechanisms underlying these findings are unclear as there is no evidence that either CCBs or betablockers altering ACE2 expression. One study including 4792 hospitalised pneumonia (bacterial and viral) case, showed increased incidence of major cardiovascular events among those who were on CCBs, betablockers or corticosteroids. 30 Impaired induction of antiviral type 1 interferon response to a range of respiratory viruses has been well described in association with corticosteroids and may also apply in the context of COVID-19 explaining association of these drugs with the severity of infection in our cohort. 31, 32 Hypertension was a strong risk factor for the development of the severe and critical forms of COVID-19 independently of antihypertensive therapy. This may be related to higher levels of endothelin in hypertensive patients and its effect on innate immune response. There is strong evidence that the innate immune response is key in the . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 24.20077875 doi: medRxiv preprint development of severe Recent data suggest that macrophages contribute to, and protect from, hypertension and that macrophage depletion augments the chronic hypertensive response to endothelin-1, (ET-1). 34 High levels ET-1 are linked to lung damage in HIV infection. 35 It is thus possible that arterial hypertension which is linked to higher levels of ET-1, more vasoconstriction, and lower blood flow, may be contributing to lower levels of macrophages (i.e. lower innate immune response) and potentially to build-up of fluid in the lungs (pulmonary oedema).
In relation to anti-diabetic medications, we find a disproportionate increase in the intake of anti-diabetic medications such as DPP-inhibitors and insulin amongst COVID-19 patients compared to control group, however none of these medications were significantly associated with disease severity. The higher intake of anti-diabetic medications might be linked to a longer duration or lower glycaemic control and points to the role of metabolic inflammation in predisposing individuals to developing the more severe form of the disease. 36 Our study has a number of strengths. The case-control design with cases from multiple hospitals and a large, prospective, population-based control group with 98% coverage of the local population has provided the power needed to identify independent risk factors including medication use to assess the risk factors for COVID-19 in this population. We have included consecutive cases from each of the secondary care hospitals to reflect the full range of case-mix seen in routine clinical practice. Case definition and assessment of severity of COVID-19 were adherent to national guidelines consistently across all the centers involved in this study. 16 The limitations of our study include the retrospective nature of the COVID-19 cohort, which could lead to possible under-recording of some less common comorbidities and drug history, in particular related to use of glucocorticoids. Even though we included . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . 610 cases, we may have modest power to evaluate potential risk factors with low frequency. In the large case series (n=1099) of COVID-19 patients,1 a number of comorbidities such as cardiovascular (2.5%), cerebrovascular (1.4%) and chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases (1.1%) were infrequent and cancers, immunodeficiency and chronic kidney disease altogether formed 1.8% of the COVID-19 cases. Most patients with cardiovascular comorbidities qualify for angiotensinconverting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI) or angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB) therapy.
However, prescribing patterns of these drugs vary widely from China to the UK where ACEIs are much more commonly prescribed. 37 Although with a much larger sample size this may prove to be significant if the effect is real, this compared poorly with other factors contributing to severity such hypertension (OR 2.3) or the use of immunosuppressants (OR 7.56). In addition, low case-fatality rate of 0.6% means that we were not able to assess risk factors associated with mortality.
We have identified higher BMI, diabetes and cardio/ cerebrovascular disease as independent risk factors for the development of COVID-19. Prior treatment with ARBs and diuretics was associated with reduced risk and CCBs with increased risk of developing COVID-19. Other antihypertensive drugs were not associated with increased risk of severe or critical form of the infection. So, we found no evidence to alter ARBs or ACEIs therapy in the context of the pandemic. Patients on corticosteroids with COVID-19 are at higher risk of developing severe form and therefore be monitored closely.
. CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020 Error bars represent 95% CI.
. CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . 
