The novel coronavirus 2019-nCoV/SARS-CoV-2 infection has shown discernible variability across the globe. While in some countries people are recovering relatively quicker, in others, recovery times have been comparatively longer and numbers of those succumbing to it high.
In this study, we aimed to evaluate the likely association between an individual's ancestry and the extent of COVID-19 manifestation employing Europeans as the case study. We employed 10,215 ancient and modern genomes across the globe assessing 597,573 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Pearson's correlation coefficient (r) between various ancestry proportions of European genomes and COVID-19 death/recovery ratio was calculated and its significance was statistically evaluated. We found significant positive correlation (p=0.03) between European Mesolithic hunter gatherers (WHG) ancestral fractions and COVID-19 death/recovery ratio and a marginally significant negative correlation (p=0.06) between Neolithic Iranian ancestry fractions and COVID-19 death/recovery ratio. We further identified 404 immune response related single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) by comparing publicly available 753 genomes from various European countries against 838 genomes from various Eastern Asian countries in a genome wide association study (GWAS). Prominently, we identified that SNPs associated with Interferon stimulated antiviral response, Interferon-stimulated gene 15 mediated antiviral mechanism and 2′-5′ oligoadenylate synthase mediated antiviral response show large differences in allele frequencies between Europeans and East Asians. Overall, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study evaluating the likely association between genetic ancestry and COVID-19 manifestation. While our current findings improve our overall understanding of the COVID-19, we note that the development of effective therapeutics will benefit immensely from more detailed analyses of individual genomic sequence data from COVID-19 patients of varied ancestries.
leading to catastrophic consequences. Notably, COVID-19, caused by 2019-nCoV has shown significant worldwide variability, especially in terms of the death/recovery ratio that pertains to a ratio of the number of deaths caused by the novel coronavirus to numbers of infected individuals recovered within the same time interval. While infected individuals from some countries have recovered relatively quickly with lower morbidities, those from some other parts of the world appear to remain affected for longer with slower recovery times and demonstrate relatively higher death/recovery ratios [2] .This is suggestive of a likely population level genetic variation in terms of susceptibility to the coronavirus and COVID-19 manifestation.
A case in point in this context appears to be ACE2 that encodes for angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 and has been speculated to be the host receptor for the novel corona virus [3, 4] . Recently, Cao et al. analysed 1700 variants in ACE2 from China MAP and 1000 Genomes Project databases [5] .While they reported the absence of natural resistant mutations for coronavirus S-protein binding across their study populations, their study revealed significant variation in allele frequencies (AF) among the populations assessed, including between people of East Asian and European ancestries. They speculated that the differences in AFs of ACE2 coding variants, likely associated with its elevated expression may influence ACE2 function and putatively impact SARS infectivity among the evaluated populations. Additionally, a majority of the 15 eQTL variants they identified had discernibly higher AFs among East Asian populations compared to Europeans, which may suggest differential susceptibility towards coronavirus in these two populations under similar conditions.
In addition to ACE2, COVID-19 manifestation may also be modulated by several immune response modulating genes. Li et al. (2020) mentioned that coronavirus infection causes secretion of large quantities of chemokines and cytokines (such as IL 1, IL 6, IL 8, IL 21, TNF β and MCP 1) in the infected cells, additionally, the host's major antiviral machinery comprising of Interferons (IFNs) may also the limit of coronavirus [6] . Overall it can be speculated that variations in host genes encoding for interleukins and interferons may be responsible for differential manifestation of COVID-19.
Further recent studies have shown that variants associated with immune responsiveness display significant population-specific signals of natural selection [7] . In particular, the authors showed that admixture with Neanderthals may have differentially shaped the immune systems in European populations, introducing novel regulatory variants, which may affect preferential responses to viral infections. European genomes were further modulated and distinguished owing to multiple waves of migration throughout their ancient past. We note here that while Neolithic European populations predominantly descended from
Anatolian migrants, European ancestry shows a distinct West-East cline in indigenous European Mesolithic hunter gatherers (WHGs) [8] . At the same time Eastern Europe was in the rudimentary stages of the formation of Bronze Age steppe ancestry, which later spread into Central and Northern Europe through East-West expansion [9] . Further, high genetic substructure between North-Western and South-Eastern hunter-gatherers has also been documented recently [10] .
Ancestry specific variation in immune responses and its potential genetic and evolutionary determinants are poorly understood especially in the context of the novel coronavirus infection and COVID-19 manifestation.While COVID-19 has affected huge numbers of individuals worldwide, this pandemic has cause catastrophic damage in Europe.
Here we aimed to unravel the potential association between genetic ancestry and COVID-19
employing Europeans as the case study. In addition, using a genome wide association study (GWAS) approach we sought to discern the putative SNP markers and genes that may be likely associated with differential novel coronavirus infection by comparative analyses of the European and East Asian genomes.To this end we employed 10,215 ancient and modern genomes, obtained from the databank of Dr. David Reich, Harvard Medical School, USA (https://reich.hms.harvard.edu/datasets) to evaluate the likely correlation between European ancestry and COVID-19. Our findings revealed significant positive correlation between WHG-related ancestry and COVID-19 death/recovery ratio and marginally significant negative correlation between Neolithic Iranian ancestry and COVID-19. Finally, we identified several SNPs that may influence immune responsiveness and displaying significant differential AF between Europeans and East Asians. Our current results shine light on ancestry driven genetic factors underlying variabilities in COVID-19 infection and manifestation; it strongly advocates concerted sequencing/genotyping of COVID-19 affected patients worldwide not only to expand and substantiate our current knowledge but to develop focused population specific therapeutic approaches to mitigate this worldwide challenge.
Dataset . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint .
Genome data for the current study was obtained from the personal database of Dr. David Reich's Lab Harvard Medical School, USA (https://reich.hms.harvard.edu/datasets). The final dataset comprised of 10,215 ancient and modern genomes across the globe assessing 597,573 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). File conversions and manipulations were performed using EIG v7.2 [11] and PLINK v1.9 [12] .
COVID-19 data was obtained from 2019 Novel Coronavirus COVID-19
(2019-nCoV) Data Repository by Johns Hopkins CSSE [2] . The data available in this web portal as of Sunday, 5 th April 2020, 6 PM was used in the analyses. Indian data was obtained from Government of India coronavirus portal (https://www.mygov.in/corona-data/covid19statewise-status).
We used qpAdm [13] implemented in AdmixTools v5.1 [14, 15] infection. We surmise this ratio to be indicative of the host immune responsiveness against viral assault. Notably since the death to recovery ratio does not take into account the number of active cases, statistical bias arising due to under-reporting/under-testing of COVID-19 cases is avoided.
GWAS was performed to investigate SNPs with significant AF variations among European and East Asian genomes and likely correlated with differential COVID-19 infectivity. To this end 753 European genomes were compared to 838 Eastern Asian genomes. Standard case (higher death/recovery ratio: Europeans) -control (lowerdeath/recovery ratio: East Asians) based association analyses was performed in PLINK v1.9 using --assoc command. A Manhattan plot was generated in Haploview [16] by plotting Chisquare values of all assessed SNPs to identify the SNPs that are likely associated with COVID-19 manifestation. Highly significant SNPs were annotated using SNPnexus web-based server [17] .
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint .
We modelled all Europeans as a combination of three source populations namely EHGs, WHGs and Neolithic Iranians (see Methods) in qpAdm analysis. Among 10 European populations employed in this study, GBR (British in England and Scotland) genomes were found to have the highest WHG ancestry proportions (26.1%) (Table 1 ) and the lowest Neolithic Iranian ancestry fractions (51.5%) ( Table 2) . Notably, among the European populations evaluated, COVID-19 death to recovery ratio till date, is the highest among the British people: death/recovery ratio=31.94. In contrast, Russian and Finnish populations which could not be modelled with WHG ancestry so far appear to have less detrimental COVID-19 manifestation with 0.13 and 0.08 death to recovery ratio respectively. Consistent with this, we found significant positive correlation (Pearson's Correlation; r=0.58; p=0.03) between WHG ancestry fraction and COVID-19 death/recovery ratio and marginally significant negative correlation (Pearson's Correlation; r= -0.52; p=0.06) between Neolithic Iranian ancestry fractions and COVID-19 death/recovery ratio. We did not find any correlation between EHG ancestry fraction and COVID-19 manifestation.
Congruent with correlation results, we found significant linear positive association between WHG ancestry fraction and COVID-19 death/recovery ratio (Model 0) (R 2 =0.34, p=0.039). Further, we found significant association between the combination of WHG ancestry and 15 days' mean temperature and COVID-19 death/recovery ratio (Model 4) (R 2 =0.39, p=0.042) (Supplementary Table 1 ). LRT determined Model 0 to be the best model, indicating COVID-19 manifestation can be best explained by variability in WHG ancestry fractions among European populations. Model 0 was found to be highly significantly better than Model 1 (Temperature alone) and Model 2 (Humidity alone) in determining the variability of COVID-19 death/recovery ratio among the study populations, suggesting that climatic factors such as colder temperature and variation in humidityalone cannot explain the variability of COVID-19 manifestation among European countries. However, in combination with peoples' ancestral make-up, temperature disparities can explain the variation in COVID-19 death/recovery ratio.
To evaluate the robustness of our results, we repeated all our analyses with the data available in Johns Hopkins CSSE 2 web portal as of Wednesday, 8 th April 2020. Notably, we did not find any discernible difference between the results obtained employing 5 th April data and those obtained employing 8 th April data.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054627 doi: medRxiv preprint For GWAS, 753 genomes from across Europe with high COVID-19 death/recovery ratio (case) were compared to 838 Eastern Asian genomes with relatively lower COVID-19 death/recovery ratio (control). Out of 597,573 SNPs employed in this study, 385,450 (64.5%) markers revealed highly significant variation (Chi square≥ 6.63; P<0.01) between Europeans and East Asians, indicating the discernible differences in the genetic tapestry of the two populations (Fig. 1) . For stringency, we annotated only the top 10,000 ranked SNPs 
The novel coronavirus 2019-nCoV/SARS-CoV-2 infection has shown discernible variability across the globe. While in some countries people are recovering relatively quicker, in others, recovery times have been comparatively longer, and numbers of those succumbing are higher.Here we sought to investigate the likely association between genetic ancestry determinants and the extent of COVID-19 manifestation employing Europeans as a case study.
The European story . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054627 doi: medRxiv preprint Till date, Europe has been most severely impacted owing to the COVID-19 infection. Our findings revealed asignificant positive correlation between WHG-related ancestry and COVID-19 death/recovery ratio (p=0.03) and marginally significant negative correlation between Neolithic Iranian ancestry and COVID-19 (p=0.06). Further, we found significant linear positive association between WHG ancestry fraction and COVID-19 death/recovery ratio (R 2 =0.34, p=0.039). Further, we found significant association between the combination of WHG ancestry and 15 days' mean temperature and COVID-19 death/recovery ratio (R 2 =0.39, p=0.042). Previously it has been shown that European genomes evolved uniquely with regards to immune responsiveness, particularly pertaining to responses against viral infections [8] . Admixture with Neanderthals is believed to have introduced unique regulatory variants into European genomes, which likely modulated immune responses in European populations [7] .We surmise that the European genome architecture has been extensively modulated by the complex origin and migration history of modern-day Europeans during Paleolithic, Mesolithic and Neolithic periods that in turn contributed via introduction of novel variants in European genomes.
Modern-day European genomic diversity has been thought to be shaped by variable proportions of local hunter-gatherer ancestry (WHGs) [18] . While Neolithic, Iberian genomes (modern day Spanish and Portuguese populations) revealed widespread evidence of WHG admixture (10-27%), Neolithic German populations (Linearb and keramik-LBK culture) revealed ~4-5% of the same [18] .Notably the variation in WHG ancestry fractions among German and Spanish people correlated with the observed variabilities in COVID-19 death/recovery ratio in these two countries; German populations with discernably lower WHG fractions have a current death/recovery ratio of 0.05, however, in Spain the ratio is 0.33, which corresponded to high WHG fraction among Spanish populations. Interestingly, the other Iberian country, Portugal, despite reporting fewer numbers of COVID-19 cases compared to neighboring Spain, has a significantly high death to recovery ratio (3.93) underscoring the likely association between high WHG ancestry proportions in Iberians and the severity of COVID-19 infection. The WHG ancestry proportion is discernibly high among the Basque people in Spain (33.9%) and congruent with our hypothesis, the death percentage in Basque country is significantly higher compared to other Spanish provinces (https://www.statista.com/statistics/1102882/cases-of-coronavirus-confirmed-in-spain-in-2020-by-region/). However, owing to unavailability of data we were unable to calculate the death to recovery ratio in Basque people. Nevertheless, taking our findings into consideration, since the WHG fraction was found to be the highest among the Basque people . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054627 doi: medRxiv preprint among all populations assessed in this study, we surmise the death to recovery ratio in Basque country will be higher than Spain's countrywide mean. A similar correlation between WHG ancestry and the extent of COVID-19 manifestation was observed for the UK, where GBR genomes depicted high WHG ancestry fractions (>25%) and was correlated with high COVID-19 death/recovery ratio in the country (31.94).
Italy, one of the worst hit countries with the COVID-19 pandemic, showed significant nationwide variation in the severity of disease manifestation (death/recovery ratio=0.73). While COVID-19 related deaths in Northern Italy has surpassed 12,000, less than 1,000 deaths have been so far reported in Southern Italy. Interestingly, these numbers are consistent with WHG fractions among Italian genomes, thus while WHG ancestry fractions were found to be ~23.1% and 9.2% among Northern and Southern Italian genomes respectively.
In contrast, only a handful of COVID-19 cases have been so far reported in Russia, the largest country in the world, and we assessed whether this is owing to their genomic make-up. All modern-day Russians originated from two groups of East Slavic tribes: Northern and Southern and have 0% WHG ancestry fraction. They are genetically similar to modern-day other Slavic populations such as Belarusians. We note that COVID-19 death/recovery ratios are significantly low in both Russia (0.13) and Belarus (0.09).
Furthermore, COVID-19 manifestation was found to be far less detrimental in the Central Asian countries that were once part of former Soviet Union (USSR) such as Kazakhstan (death to recovery ratio=0.16), Kyrgyzstan (0.11), Tajikistan (0), Turkmenistan (0) and Uzbekistan (0.08). Finally, Finnish genomes that were shaped by migrations from Siberia ~3500 years ago [19] with no WHG ancestral proportions, have a relatively smaller COVID-19 death to recovery ratio (0.08).
Overall, our results have revealed a clear association between WHG and Neolithic Iranian ancestry fractions and the acuteness of COVID-19 manifestation suggesting the presence of unique underlying genetic variants in European genomes that maybe correlated with their variable susceptibility and immune responsiveness.
The COVID-19 infection has so far shown an interesting pattern in Central and South America. While in countries like Ecuador and Brazil the death to recovery ratio is significantly higher (Ecuador: 1.72 and Brazil: 3.5), it is intermediate in Columbia (0.38), and . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054627 doi: medRxiv preprint discernibly low in countries such as Chile (0.05), Uruguay (0.05), Peru (0.07), Mexico (0. 12) and Argentina (0.15). We hypothesized that this variation in COVID-19 severity may be attributed to the genetic ancestry of Central and South American populations. It has been reported that all present-day Native Americans have descended from at least four distinct ancient migration waves from Asia [20] . Two of them being ancient migrations (~15,000 years ago) from south-central Siberia (Mal'ta Upper Palaeolithic site: MA1 related) and the more recent (~5000 years ago) when Palaeo-Eskimos spread throughout the American Arctic [21] . MA1, is genetically proximal to all modern-day Native Americans (14-38% Native American ancestry) and has been found to be basal to modern-day West Eurasians, without any close affinity to East Asians [21] . MA-1 mitochondrial genome was determined to be associated with haplogroup U, which is found at high frequency among Mesolithic European hunter-gatherers (WHGs) [21] , depicting a connection between the WHG and modern-day South American genomes. In our analyses Americans could be best modelled as a combination of two source populations namely MA1 and Eskimos. We used a mixture of seven ancient and modern-day populations comprising of CHG, WHG, Sweden_HG_Motala, Papuan, Chukchi, Karitiana and Mbuti as our 'Right' outgroup populations (O7).
Interestingly, our results indicated that countries such as Mexico and Peru with lower death to recovery ratio have higher Eskimo ancestry fraction (13.2% and 20.3%) and lower MA1 fraction (86.8% and 79.7%) compared to our other study populations. Further, we found ~zero Eskimo ancestry fraction among Columbians and Purto Ricans where death to recovery ratio is relatively high.The high death to recovery ratio in Brazil (3.5) is reminiscent of similarly high ratios in Portugal (3.9) and may be attributed to the predominant Portuguese ancestry in the former.
As noted above, significant variation in AFs of ACE2 gene, the presumed receptor of novel coronavirus has been reported among people from East Asian and European ancestry [5] . The authors of this study speculated that the differences in AFs of ACE2 coding variants are associated with variable expression of ACE2 in tissues. Additionally, they reported that most eQTL variants identified by them had discernibly higher AFs among East Asian populations compared to Europeans, which may result in differential susceptibility towards the novel coronavirus in these two populations under similar conditions.Consistent with these findings we identified 404 SNPs that are associated with host immune response such as Interferon . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint .
(IFN) stimulated antiviral response, Interferon-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) mediated antiviral mechanism and 2′-5′ oligoadenylate synthase (OAS) mediated antiviral response and show large differences in AFs between Europeans and East Asians. The genetic differences between East and Southeast Asians with Europeans can be largely attributed to their distinctive ancestral origins. Most East Asians derive their ancestry from Mongolian huntergatherers who dispersed over Northeast Asia 6000-8000 years ago [22] . Similarly, Southeast
Asians exhibit a mixture of East Asian ancestry (Southern Chinese agriculturalist) and a diverged form of Eastern Eurasian hunter-gatherer ancestry (EHGs) [23] . People with similar ancestry can be found as far south as Indonesia [23] . As noted above EHG ancestry fraction death to recovery ratio has remained discernibly low (0.04). Overall, our results indicate that people of East and Southeast Asian ancestry appear to be intrinsically protected against the most debilitating effects of the novel coronavirus infection.
South Asians have a long and complex history of admixture between immigrant gene-pools originating primarily in West Eurasia, Southeast Asia and the South Asian hunter-gatherer lineage with close genetic proximity to the present-day Andamanese people (Ancient Ancestral South Indians: AASI) who likely arrived in India through the "southern exit" wave out of Africa [24] . People of AASI ancestry admixed with an undivided ancient Iranian lineage that subsequently split and lead to the formation of early Iranian farmers, herders, and hunter gatherers approximately in the 3 rd millennium BCE. This gene pool is referred to as the 'Indus Periphery' gene pool [24, 25] , which is thought to be the major source of subsequent peopling of South Asia. Modern-day South Asian genome is composed of largely four ancestral components: Ancestral North Indian (ANI), Ancestral South Indian (ASI), Ancestral Tibeto-Burman (ATB) and Ancestral Austro-Asiatic (AAA) [26] . ANI and ASI gene pools likely arose around 2 nd millennium BCE during the decline of Indus Valley Civilization (IVC), which prompted multiple waves of migrations across the South Asia. The southward migration of Middle to Late Bronze Age people from Steppe (Steppe MLBA) into . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054627 doi: medRxiv preprint South Asia is thought to have coincided with the decline of IVC. It is speculated that the people of Indus-Periphery-related ancestry, while migrating northward, admixed with Steppe MLBA immigrants to form the ANI, while the others, who migrated southward and eastward admixed with AASI and formed the ASI [25] . Austroasiatic speakers originated in Southeast Asia and subsequently migrated to South Asia during the Neolithic period. The admixture between local South Asians and incoming Southeast Asians took place ~2000-3800 years ago giving rise to the AAA ancestry. Notably, the South Asian population(s) with whom the incoming Southeast Asians mingled were AASI related with little to no West Eurasian ancestry fraction [27] . Finally, it has been showed that the Tibeto-Burmans Nevertheless, the severity of COVID-19 manifestation is likely to vary appreciably across the South Asian populations. Approximately 12% people of ANI and ASI ancestries belong to mitochondrial haplogroup U, which, as described above, is found at high frequency among Mesolithic European hunter-gatherers (WHGs) [21] . Our interrogation of worldwide populations suggests that the WHG ancestral fraction is likely associated with acute COVID- . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054627 doi: medRxiv preprint
The present study shines light of underlying genetic signatures that may be associated with disparate COVID-19 severity and manifestation in worldwide populations. Nevertheless we note that the current work has been performed using publicly available genomic data and a more robust understanding in this regard will emanate from sequencing/genotyping endeavours for COVID-19 patients across the spectrum of varied nationalities/ancestries and geographical locationsincluding individuals with mild to moderate symptoms, severe manifestations and death. Our results strongly advocate the adoption of a rigorous worldwide population genetics driven approach to expand and substantiate our current knowledge, as well as facilitate thedevelopment of population specific therapeutics to mitigate this worldwide challenge. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054627 doi: medRxiv preprint . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054627 doi: medRxiv preprint . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
is the (which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054627 doi: medRxiv preprint
