The ability to detect the SARS-CoV-2 in a widespread epidemic is crucial for screening of carriers and for the success of quarantine efforts. Methods based on real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) and sequencing are being used for virus detection and characterization. However, RNA viruses are known for their high genetic diversity which poses a challenge for the design of efficient nucleic acid-based assays. The first SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequences already showed novel mutations, which may affect the efficiency of available screening tests leading to false-negative diagnosis or inefficient therapeutics.
Here we describe the CoV2ID
(http://covid.portugene.com/), a free database built to facilitate the evaluation of molecular methods for detection of SARS-CoV-2 and treatment of COVID-19.
The database evaluates the available oligonucleotide sequences (PCR primers, RT-qPCR probes, etc.) considering the genetic diversity of the virus. Updated sequences alignments are used to constantly verify the theoretical efficiency of available testing methods. Detailed information on available detection protocols are also available to help laboratories implementing SARS-CoV-2 testing.
The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) was first detected in December 2019 [1] [2] [3] . Phylogenetic data implicate a zoonotic origin in Wuhan, the capital of Central China's Hubei Province, from where the novel virus rapidly spread worldwide becoming a pandemic [4] . The SARS-CoV-2 belongs to the β-coronavirus genus of the Coronaviridae family, being related with other virus causing human infections such as SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV.
The novel SARS-CoV-2 shares 80% of identity with SARS-CoV (the causing agent of the 2002-2003 SARS outbreak in Asia) and nearly 96% similar to the bat coronavirus isolate RaTG13, suggesting these animals are the likely natural reservoir of the virus [4] [5] [6] .
The SARS-CoV-2 genome consists of a single, positive-stranded RNA with approximately 30 000 nucleotides. Several genomic sequences have been made available in public databases by researchers worldwide as the epidemic progresses. The great adaptability and infection capacity of RNA viruses depends in part from their high mutation rates [7] . As expected, available SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequences show a large number of new mutations. In April 2020, more than 2500 mutations have been reported in the 2019 Novel Coronavirus Resource (2019nCoVR) of the China National Center for Bioinformation (https://bigd.big.ac.cn/ncov/variation/annotation).
Many techniques use molecules that interact with the virus RNA genome or the reverse transcribed DNA, either for clinical testing, diagnosis or determination of viral loads. PCR primers and RT-qPCR probes are been used to detect the SARS-CoV-2 (e.g., [8] [9] [10] [11] ) using molecular biology techniques. It is likely that oligonucleotides complementary to the virus RNA will be tested as possible (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 25, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.048991 doi: bioRxiv preprint antiviral agents [12, 13] . However, the SARS-CoV-2 genetic diversity can be a challenge for the efficiency of available assays since it may lead to false-negative results in detection tests or inefficient therapeutics. Polymorphisms at binding sites of PCR primers, RT-qPCR probes, small interfering RNAs may be a problem for available techniques. Here, we describe CoV2ID, a database whose objective is to help the scientific community to improve the testing and therapeutic capacity and efficiency.
The CoV2ID database (http://covid.portugene.com/) uses java graphics and dynamic tables and works with major web browsers (e.g. Internet Explorer, Mozilla Firefox, Chrome). The database provides descriptive webpages for each oligonucleotide and a search engine to access dynamic tables with numeric data and multiple sequence alignments. A SQLite local database is used for data storage and runs on an Apache web server. The dynamic HTML pages were implemented using CGI-Perl and JavaScript and the dataset tables using the JQuery plugin DataTables v1.9.4 (http://datatables.net/). Python and Perl inhouse algorithms were written and used to perform identity and pairwise calculations.
The oligonucleotides were retrieved from seven molecular assays to diagnose the SARS-CoV-2 provided by the World Health Organization (WHO) [14] . Future (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 25, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.048991 doi: bioRxiv preprint updates of the database will include peer-reviewed protocols when available.
Each oligonucleotide has a specific database code (for example, CoV2ID001). The 'CoV2ID ranking score' considers the mean value of the three different measures (PIS, 3'PIS and PPI). Further details can be found in our previous publications for the Ebola [15] and HIV [16] databases.
The 'Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 isolate Wuhan-Hu-1' with accession number NC_045512.2 was selected as reference. Genomes were obtained from the GenBank (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/sars-cov-2seqs/) and the GISAID Initiative (https://www.gisaid.org/). The complete genomes were obtained for all know human coronaviruses: SARS-CoV-2, HCoV-OC43, HCoV-HKU1, HCoV-NL63, HCoV-229E, MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV. The list of acknowledgments to the original source of the data available at GISAID can be found in 'Acknowledgments' section of our database.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The first release of the CoV2ID database (March 2020) includes 52 SARS-CoV-2 oligonucleotides (38 primers and 14 probes) retrieved from seven molecular assays to diagnose the SARS-CoV-2 provided by the World Health Organization (WHO) [14] . The oligonucleotides are located in the ORF1ab, S, ORF3a, E, M and N genes. The database provides an interface for browsing, filtering and downloading data from the different oligonucleotides annotated according to the SARS-CoV-2 reference genome. For each oligonucleotide, it is possible to find (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 25, 2020. (Table 1 ). Our analyses revealed that oligonucleotides from different protocols have a perfect homology to all available genomes (CoV2ID score of 100%). For example, we identified two probes (HKU-NP and Pasteur_nCoV_IP4-14084Probe) that are 100% complementary to all genomes. The values will probably change as more sequences are added to the alignments, but these results are already a good indication of their sequence conservation.
On the contrary, some oligonucleotides have several mismatches to SARS-CoV-2 genomes. There are 16 oligonucleotides with a CoV2ID score of below 80%.
For example, primers NIID_WH-1_F24381 and NIID_WH-1_Seq_F24383 have a CoV2ID score of below 50%. The primer NIID_WH-1_Seq_F519 has a PIS of only 15%, meaning that only 15% of its positions are conserved across all sequences in the alignments. Previous works have already detected polymorphisms in primers and probes that may cause problem when performing (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 25, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.048991 doi: bioRxiv preprint the testing [20, 21] .
In terms of pairs of primers, we identified two pairs with a CoV2ID score of 100%:
CoV2ID020 -CoV2ID036 and CoV2ID036 -CoV2ID041. Nevertheless, many other pairs of primers have high CoV2ID scores. For example, 25 pairs of primers have a CoV2ID score above 97.52%.
False positives could be a problem when using PCR primers and probes due to binding in non-target species. SARS-CoV-2 oligonucleotides with a high divergence to other strains should be preferred. Therefore, we have identified the most divergent oligonucleotides in other coronaviruses, i.e., the best ones to avoid false positives ( Table 2) . Twenty-eight primers and probes have a CoV2ID score in CoV2ID_alig03 below 20%, meaning they are highly divergent from other human coronaviruses. On the contrary, only three oligonucleotides have a CoV2ID score above 50%. For example, two probes from the Corman et al.
protocol [11] , RdRP_SARSr-P1 and RdRP_SARSr-P2, have CoV2ID scores above 67%. In general, available SARS-CoV-2 oligonucleotides diverge from other human coronaviruses by several positions. Nevertheless, caution is recommended when performing the experiments as some homology is observed in primer-and probe-binding sites.
We also analyzed the genetic diversity across the SARS-CoV-2 genome by measuring the diversity scores in 100 nucleotide sliding windows with 50 nucleotides of overlap. The PIS and PPI values revealed several 100 nucleotide regions completely conserved across the genome (see table on the database tab 'Genome variation'), which may be used for the design of new oligonucleotides.
Twenty-one 100 nucleotide windows (3.4%) from a total of 614 windows had a value of PIS of 100%. A total of 88 windows has a PPI of 100%.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
If the aim is to choose an oligonucleotide located in a conserved genomic region, the user can navigate through the "Search" tab on the top menu bar and open the "The best oligonucleotides" tab. The table with oligonucleotides is automatically ordered by the "CoV2ID Score" column filter. The user can also access the oligonucleotide summary information by clicking in the ID hyperlink.
The database can also be used to filter all columns using the search tool. For instance, to access the best oligonucleotide located in ORF1a genomic region, the user can type "ORF1a" in the search box. The database table filter and only display the records related with the ORF1a region. In this example, the oligonucleotide CoV2ID028 has the highest CoV2ID score in the selected region.
If the purpose is to design a new oligonucleotide, the database section "Genome (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 25, 2020. . Figure 1 . Screenshot of the data and tools included in the CoV2ID database. The website includes a NCBI sequence viewer of the SARS-CoV-2 reference genome with oligonucleotide annotations and feature tracks. The 'Oligos' section provides details on the available oligonucleotides. Multiple sequence alignments can be visualized using a multifunctional sequence viewer. The oligonucleotides are ranked according to their conservation in the multiple sequence alignments. The website also provided a scatter plot describing a sliding window analysis of diversity measures across the SARS-CoV-2 genome and the details of the detection protocols.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 25, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.048991 doi: bioRxiv preprint
