Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a positive single stranded RNA virus that causes a highly contagious Corona Virus Disease (COVID19). Entry of SARS-CoV-2 in human cells depends on binding of the viral spike (S) proteins to cellular receptor Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) and on S protein priming by host cell serine protease TMPRSS2. Recently COVID19 has been declared pandemic by World Health Organization yet high differences in disease outcomes across countries have been seen. We provide evidences based on analyses of existing public datasets and by using various insilico approaches to explain some of these as factors that may explain population level differences. One of the key factors might be entry of virus in host cells due to differential interaction of viral proteins with host cell proteins due to different genetic backgrounds. Based on our findings, we conclude that higher expression of ACE2 facilitated by natural variations, acting as Expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) and with different frequencies in different populations, results in ACE2 homo-dimerization which is disadvantageous for TMPRSS2 mediated cleavage of ACE2 and becomes more difficult in presence of broad neutral amino acid transporter, B0AT1 (coded by SLC6A19), that usually does not express in Lungs. We also propose that the monomeric ACE2 has higher preferential binding with SARS-CoV-2 S-Protein vis-a-vis its dimerized counterpart. Further, eQTLs in TMPRSS2 and natural structural variations in the gene may also result in differential outcomes towards priming of viral S-protein, a critical step for entry of Virus in host cells. In addition, we suggest some other potential key host genes like ADAM17, RPS6, HNRNPA1, SUMO1, NACA, BTF3 and some other proteases as Cathepsins, that might have a critical role. Understanding these population specific differences may help in developing appropriate management strategies.
The recent emergence of corona virus disease (COVID19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has resulted in >25 Million infections and >170 thousands deaths worldwide so far, and the numbers are increasing exponentially [https://covid19.who.int/]. SARS-CoV-2 is reported to be originated in bats [1] and transmitted to humans via unknown intermediate host. However, its origin is still being questioned time and again. With the declaration of SARS-CoV-2 as pandemic by World Health Organisation (WHO), extensive research worldwide has been carried out. It has been established that Human ACE2 mediates SARS-CoV-2 entry into cells through its Spike (S) Protein an primarily makes entry to host body through respiratory tract with recent reporting of nasal epithelial cells as potential initial infection site. [2] Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is functional receptor on human cells for this newly originated coronavirus [3] with higher affinity then severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) originated in 2002. [4] . However, no substantial evidence exists that ACE2 higher expression primarily is associated with degree of infection and in addition COVID19 lethality is mostly driven by the extent of underlying lung injury [5] whereas a negative correlation has been reported between ACE2 expression and lung injury [6] , making it an interesting question to explore.
High differences in clinical outcomes and across countries have been seen [https://covid19.who.int/] and noted that neither all people who are exposed to SARS-CoV-2 develop infection nor all infected patients end up in severe respiratory illness [7] which cannot be explained by immunity alone [8] . This results in hypothesis of differential genetic susceptibility to COVID19 and virulence of SARS-CoV-2 in different populations [9] . Efforts are being made worldwide to understand it better and it becomes complex with reports that BCG vaccination reduces morbidity and mortality for COVID19 in human population [10] . Due shed some light on better understanding of differential susceptibility to COVID19 and virulence of SARS-CoV-2. In the present study, we have tried to exploit existing literature to understand mechanisms of correlations, of host genes, specifically associated with interactions related to ACE2 and some prominent Viral proteins, using in-silico approaches and also tried to understand these as factors explaining population level differences.
As SARS-CoV-2 is primarily a respiratory pathogen, the present study was to understand mechanisms of its entry to cells in lungs and believe it can be extrapolated to other respiratory tract tissues to explore potential factors that may result in to differential outcomes in respiratory illness. To being with, we started with the most studied host protein ACE2 and tried to understand its interaction with SARS-CoV-2 S-Protein through Molecular Dynamics simulations, followed by adding other interacting proteins. We further added layers of other methods to understand better the potential causes and outcomes.
Recently submitted experimental structure 6M17.pdb of ACE2 dimer bound to two B0AT1 (SL6A19) and two receptor-binding domains (RBD) of SARS-CoV-2 with overall resolution of 2.90 Angstrom was downloaded from the Protein Data Bank for structural, visualization and dynamics analysis [15] . This structure was corrected for missing amino acids, side chains, missing hydrogen atoms, correction of disulphide bonds etc., optimized for pKa corresponding to physiological pH 7.2 and energy minimized to correct steric clashes using the Protein Preparation Wizard of Schrodinger Maestro [16] . Predefined solvation model TIP3P was used and overall neutrality of the system was maintained by addition of Na+ and Clcounter ions [17] . Physiological salt concentration of 0.15 Molar was generated through addition of NaCl.
Periodic boundary condition of 10 Angstrom was set using the System Builder Tool of Desmond software [18] . Total two MD simulations, each 10 nanosecond long, were conducted. In one of the simulation, six chains i.e. ACE2 dimer with each monomer bound to a B0AT1 (SL6A19) and RBD domain was simulated and the resulting solvated system consisted of 424,847 atoms, while for other simulation monomeric ACE2 bound to viral RBD consisted of 174,900 atoms. Root mean square fluctuation (RMSF) and principal component analysis were done through R based BIO3D module [19] . MMGBSA free energy of binding between proteins was calculated through Prime Software of Schrodinger Suite [20] . Structural visualizations and images were traced using pyMOL and VM D [20] [21] .
Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) portal at https://gtexportal.org/ was used to explore various gene expression. By Tissue, Multigene Query as well as transcript browser was used to understand expression of splice variants and exons in Lungs. eQTLs were viewed by GTEx IGV Browser as well as GTEx Locus (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.050534 doi: bioRxiv preprint Browser was used to plot gene specific eQTLs. eQTLs and other gene regulatory information, splice variants and ESTs were also explored through UCSC genome browser https://genome.ucsc.edu/ with build GRCh37/hg19. Table browser was used to interact various datasets to look for overlaps and filter outcomes. Retrieved information was saved in files as well as plotted on UCSC browser as custom tracks. Comparison of RNA expression and Protein expression, mainly in lungs, was done at The Human Protein Atlas [22] at www.proteinatlas.org. HaploReg v4.1 (https://pubs.broadinstitute.org/mammals/haploreg/haploreg.php) was used to annotate effect of noncoding genome variants of regulation motifs.
Genetic data for global population groups was explored through the GnomAD portal at https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/, as well as dbSNP database of NCBI at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp. Gene specific SNPs data was also retrieved from 1000 genomes (1000G) Phase 3 data set available through https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/variation/tools/1000genomes as per Homo sapiens:GRCh37.p13 out by Clustal Omega tool [23] . The protein domain information and transcript variation were retrieved from Uniport [24] , Prosite [25] , Pfam [26] and ENSEMBL [27] , respectively. The homology model of the S protein and TMRPSS2 constructed using Swiss model [28] , whereas 3D structure of the ACE2 retrieved from the PDB database (PDB ID: 6M17). These structures were energy minimized by the Chiron energy minimization server [29] . The binding site residues of the proteins retrieved from Uniport and literature. The variant structure of the TMRPSS2 protein was generated using WHATIF server [30] and energy minimized.
The effect of the variant was analyzed using HOPE [31] and I-mutant [32] . The I-mutant method allows us to predict stability of the protein due to mutation. The docking studies for wild and mutant TMRPSS2 with S protein and ACE2 carried out using HADDOCK [33] .
We downloaded the SARS-CoV-2 genome (Accession number: MT121215) from the NCBI database. In order to find the Host-Pathogen Interactions (HPIs), the SARS-CoV-2 protein sequences were subjected to Host-Pathogen Interaction Database (HPIDB 3.0) [34, 35] . In addition to the host proteins, we added two more proteins (TMPRSS2 and SLC6A19) which found to have an important role in the mechanism of viral entry [14] . The protein-protein interaction (PPI) and transcription factor regulation of human proteins were retrieved from GeneMANIA [36] and literature [37] [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] , respectively. The Host Pathogen Interaction Network (HPIN) was visualized using Cytoscape [43] which includes the information collected from HPIDB, PPIs and TFs. Modules are defined as the set of statistics and functionally significant interacting genes [44] which is constructed by using MCODE [45] . Further, Hubs were identified using Network analyzer [46] , the plugin of Cytoscape v3.2.1. We also studied the hub proteins association with diseases using DisGeNET [47] .
The topological properties (degree distribution, average clustering coefficient and average neighbourhood connectivity) of the network, which characterizes the structure and behaviour of the HPIN.
Degree Distribution (P(k)): Degree k is the number of interaction a node in the HPIN. P(k) is the probability of randomly chosen node to have k interaction with the neighbour. The probability of degree distribution (P(k)) of the network is calculated by:
where, nk is equal to the number of nodes with degree k and N is equal to the size of the network [48, 49] .
Clustering Coefficient (C(k)): Clustering coefficient defines how strongly the nodes in a network tend to cluster together. Clustering coefficient of the i th node in undirected network can be obtained by:
)(# * ) = 2, * # * (# * − 1) (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.050534 doi: bioRxiv preprint where, ei is the number of connected pairs of the nearest-neighbour of the i-th node and ki denotes the degree of the respective node [50, 51] .
Neighborhood Connectivity (CN(k)): Neighbourhood connectivity of a node is defined as the connectivity of all the neighbours of the node [52] . The average connectivity of the nearest neighbours of a node is given by: 3 where, P(q|k) denotes the conditional probability that a link belonging to a node with connectivity k points to a node with connectivity q.
For scale free network, CN(k) is constant while it follows power law CN(k)= c -β for hierarchical network with β approximately equal to 0.5 [53] . The positive and negative signs in β indicates the assortivity or disassortivity of network respectively [54] .
Removal of high degree nodes (hubs) in biological networks may cause lethality in various complex biological networks. This idea of understanding may enable us to determine the topological features of the network architecture, important functionally related modules and hubs [55, 56] . The topological properties were calculated after each subsequent removal using the Network Analyzer plugin in Cytoscape version 3.7.1. The calculated topological properties of knock-out experiment were compared with those of the main network and the change in the properties helped in understanding the role of leading hubs in the network.
SARS-CoV-2 uses ACE2 for entry and its S-protein priming by the serine protease TMPRSS2 is key factor.
Other proteases like cathepsin B and L may be available in host cells yet only TMPRSS2 activity is essential for pathogenesis and spread [14] .
Mutagenesis experiments have reported the importance of Arginine and Lysine residues in ACE2 positioned between 697 to 716 as an important recognition site for TMPRSS2 mediated cleavage ( Figure 1A ) of ACE2.
Mapping these residues on the recently resolved structure (61M7.pdb) suggests that this region lies in symmetric dimerization interface between ACE2 homodimer and is also masked from outside by two BoAT1(SL6A19) in an overall 1:2:1 hetero-tetramer of B0AT1 (SL6A19) and ACE2 ( Figure 1A ) [15] . In a recently reported study, the overexpression of ACE2 has been reported to have an overall protective role in viral infection among patients [6] . Increased density of ACE2 on the cell surface has been observed to protect from lung injury [6] also been observed at many other instances. We propose increased expression of ACE2 due to various factors, including natural occurring variations influencing expression of the gene, may increase collisions and hence result in homo-dimerization of this protein. Binding of B0AT1 (SL6A19) to ACE2 is not dependent on ACE2 homodimerization, but its presence along with dimerised ACE2 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.050534 doi: bioRxiv preprint effectively shields the later from interaction with TMPRSS2 and may prevent it or reduce its efficiency to cleave ACE2, a hypothesis based on visualization of the available experimentally resolved structure 61M7.PDB [15] . This observation is significant since the cleaved ACE2 interacts more efficiently with the SARS CoV-2 RBD domain. To understand the mechanistic effect of dimerization, we conceived and simulated two situations: one, where ACE2 dimer is bound to two B0AT1 (SL6A19) and two, RBD domains of SARS CoV-2 and second, where only monomeric ACE2 is bound to one viral RBD. From the RMSF analysis of the simulated trajectories, we observed higher order fluctuation in monomeric ACE2's homodimerization interface while the rest of the ACE2 displayed a similar fluctuation profile including residues interacting with RBD ( Figure 2A) . PCA analysis and amino acid residue loadings on the PCs (PC1 in this case) reported slightly higher away ward conformational dynamics w.r.t RBD in dimeric ACE2 ( Figure 2B and C). This contrasting essential dynamics in dimeric ACE2 is explained well through the MM-GBSA based free energy of binding calculation between the 10th nanosecond final confirmation of ACE2-RBD complex. From both simulations through MM-GBSA method, 1.5 fold strong binding of monomeric ACE2-RBD complex compared to dimeric ACE2-RBD was observed (i.e. ΔG=-75. 58 for Dimeric ACE2-RBD vs ΔG=-116.98 for Monomeric ACE2-RBD Complex). This observation further explains the protective role of overexpressed ACE2, resulting in its dimerization and reduced affinity for the RBD domain of SARS CoV-2 S1 protein. As our current computational resources could not support longer simulations therefore, we propose longer simulations for robust statistical inference to understand this phenomenon in more details.
Further, we are also not clear whether the presence of B0AT1(SL6A19) has any allosteric effect on this observation, in addition to already observed masking of ACE2 from TMPRSS2 mediated cleavage.
Additionally, another metalloprotease ADAM17 has been reported to compete with the TMPRSS2 and cleaves ACE2 in a way that only cleavage by TMPRSS2 was reported to drive the SARS CoV entry inside the cell [57] which is yet to be explored in relation to SARS CoV-2. Recent literature also indicated the potential role of other proteases like cathepsin B/L that can functionally replace TMPRSS2, need to be evaluated extensively. [2] All these hypotheses warrant further in-silico analyses with better computational resources, as well as experimental study designs and for these we are open to seek collaborations.
However, the observations made are of high importance and emphasise on evaluation of expression of the ACE2 and BoAT1 (SL6A19) along with TMPRSS2 among patients with varied clinical response to SARS CoV-2 infection, differential outcomes and also correlation with observed mortality. Therefore differential expression of these genes among patients with displaying varied responses from asymptomatic to acute symptoms is worth exploration which may act as biomarkers if proven, to predict severity and susceptibility.
With the observations, from our MD analyses (Figures 1 and 2 ) that higher expression of ACE2 gene may promote ACE2 homo-dimerization rendering less binding affinity to SARS CoV-2 RBD as well as masking (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.050534 doi: bioRxiv preprint TMPRSS2 cleavage site (Figure 3) , evidences on eQTLs and ACE2 higher expression in East Asians [13] and reported protective role of ACE2 in lung injury [6] , we explored more about ACE2 expression as well as differential genomic backgrounds in different population groups.
Tissue Specific evaluation of ACE2 gene in GTEx portal indicated low level expression of the ACE2 in Lungs (Figure 4a and Figure 5 ). Further, it was observed that not all the transcripts and exons of the gene express in Lungs (Figure 4b and 4c ). As expression of ACE2 is less in Lungs thus, probably GTEx portal did not return cis-eQTLs for ACE2 gene in lungs. However, eQTLs for the gene were found in other tissues (Figure 6a and b) in GTEx portal. These eQTLs remained the same across tissue sets and showed similar effect patterns in expression (Figure 6b ). Yet to corelate the expression of the gene with genomic variations, regions of the gene were explored for potential regulatory elements and overlapped it with common variations through table browser tool of UCSC genome browser with assumption that the variants having population level effect should be common variants (Figure 4d and 7) . Variations data was retrieved from 1000 Genomes Phase 3 dataset and filtered for variants with at least 10% frequency of the alternate allele in global population. Overlapping the variants from both the exercises resulted in shortlisting of 2 SNPs rs1978124 and rs2106809 which were observed with differential frequency distribution in different populations of the world (Figure 8 ) at both super population group and sub population group level.
Interestingly, EAS and EUR sub population groups were observed to show relatively uniform frequency distribution within group. However, in AFR, AMR and SAS sub population groups intra population group differences were observed to be higher, indicating diversity in the gene pool of population groups. HaploReg annotations indicated that these SNPs are in region with Enhancer histone marks and DNAase activity as well as the same was observed through multiple regulatory elements tracks in UCSC Genome browser (Figure 4d and 7) including GH0XJ015596 enhancer marked by GeneHancer database. [58] Linkage Disequilibrium (LD) values as (r 2 ) with other putative proxy functional variants was also explored and mapped with UCSC genome browser. Interestingly, it was observed that SNPs rs1978124 and rs2106809 have a strong LD block of >100kb with various SNPs in absolute LD but upstream of ACE2 gene across population groups (Figure 9 ). This indicates a strong enhancer activity from the region that may affect higher expression of ACE2 gene in lungs which may facilitate ACE2 homo-dimerization (Figure 3) . However, it also requires experimental validation.
GTEx portal indicated relatively high levels of TMPRSS2 expression in Lungs (Figure 4a and Figure 10c ), differential transcription (Figure 10c ) but no protein expression in lungs (Figure 10a) . Evaluation of the Protein atlas portal, source of Figure 10a , indicated that both antibodies used for detection TMPRSS2 (not shown in Ms) were restricted to target near N terminal of the protein (either cytoplasmic domain or proximal (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.050534 doi: bioRxiv preprint extracellular domain near membrane). Evaluation of the GTEx portal for cis-eQTLs for TMPRSS2 gene in lungs, returned a large number of eQTLs but with a peculiar feature (Figure 11a and b) . The eQTLs in lungs were different as compared to other tissues and found to be concentrated in region of the gene with potential alternate transcripts (Figure 12a,b and Figure 13 ), towards end of the gene in relatively high expressing exons (Figure 12b) and coding for the amino acid sequence that has putative functional role in protein as serine protease domain (Figure 12a ) critical for ACE2 cleavage and SARS CoV-2 S-Protein priming.
Variations data was retrieved from 1000 Genomes Phase 3 dataset and filtered for variants with at least 10% frequency of the alternate allele in global population and overlapped it with cis-eQTLs data resulting in 10 SNPs (rs463727, rs55964536, rs4818239, rs734056, rs4290734, rs2276205, rs34783969, rs11702475, rs62217531 and rs383510). Annotation of the SNPs indicated all the SNPs cluster together and are in strong LD block (Figure 13 and Figure 14a ). HaploReg annotations indicated Enhancer histone marks and DNAase activity in the regions overlapping these SNPs amongst these rs4818239 showed a prominent putative functional role (Figure 14b ) which further requires experimental validation. However, the frequency distribution of the variant rs4818239 in different populations groups of 1000G showed interesting differential pattern (Figure 14c) . We also explored if any alternate functional variations, yet common in populations exist by screening TMPRSS2 gene through genomAD browser and filtered for missense only variations. The search returned rs75603675 (NP_001128571.1:p.Gly8Val or G8V) and rs12329760
(NP_001128571.1:p.Val197Met or V197M), also observed with differential frequency distribution in 1000G populations (Figure 14d and 14e) . The observations indicate TMPRSS2 variants may influence interaction with ACE2 as well as SARS CoV-2 (Figure 3 ) resulting in population specific differential outcomes.
We further opted to explore more the structure and function of TMPRSS2 protein. Pairwise sequence alignment of two isoforms of TMPRSS2 suggests that Isoform-2 lack 37 residues at N-terminal compare to Isoform-1, which was the longest transcript and codes for 529 amino acids (Figure 15 ). Since the human amino acid with different properties, which could disturb this domain and can abolish its function. Analyses of another variation rs75603675 (p.Gly8Val or G8V) showed that wild-type residue, glycine flexibility might (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.050534 doi: bioRxiv preprint be necessary for the protein function and alteration in this position can abolish this function as the observed torsion angles for this residue were unusual. It could be speculated that only glycine was flexible enough to make these torsion angles, change at the location into another residue would force the local backbone into an incorrect conformation and may disturb the local structure. The variant residue was also observed to be more hydrophobic than the wild-type residue. Since sequence similarity search did not find any significant template at the N-terminal of this protein, we could not generate a quality model for isoform-2, which contains G8V variation; hence we carried out sequence-based stability analysis. The results suggest G8V variation could increase the stability of the TMPRSS2 protein with ∆∆G value of -0.10 kcal/mol. Further, it is known that Arginine and lysine residues within amino acids 697 to 716 are essential for efficient ACE2 cleavage by TMPRSS2 [57] and recent studies have shown that SARS CoV-2 uses the ACE2 for entry and the serine protease TMPRSS2 for S protein priming. Based on information from previous studies, we docked the TMPRSS2 p.Val197Met wild-type and variant protein with ACE2 and S protein of SARS CoV-2. The docking results suggest that the variant 197M protein could promote the binding to S-protein and inhibit the binding with ACE2 (Figure 16) . However, these observations need critical revaluation as well as experimental work to understand these interactions better.
One of the interesting gene is SLC6A19 that codes for protein B0AT1 that expresses in very limited number of tissues and reported absent in Lungs (Figure 4a and Figure 17a,b,c) . Our findings indicated its protective role with competitive hinderance in binding to TMPRSS2. As its expression was observed to be very low in Lungs we resolved to look for indirect signatures that may have putative role in providing differential susceptibility. We noticed several variations clustering together in a potential enhancer region (Figure 17d and e) and with differential frequencies in different populations. eQTL analyses at GTEx portal also showed huge list of potential SNPs upregulating or down regulating SLC6A19 expression in Pancreas, leaver and whole blood cells as well as with overlap with potential Transcription factor binding sites (Figure 17f) . We hypothesize a potential chance of some natural occurring variation/s that can induce expression of BoAT1 in respiratory tract thus providing protective role in this scenario (Figure 3) . However, this requires more extensive computational exploration as well as experiential validations.
We believed additional genes and factors might be playing role thus, we further carried out a systems biology study to identify these novel key regulators that may influence this Human and SARS CoV-2 interaction. A (Figure 18A) . From the HPIN, we identified hubs, namely RPS6, NACA, HNRNPA1, BTF3 and (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.050534 doi: bioRxiv preprint SUMO1 with 19, 18, 17, 16 & 12 degrees, respectively in the network (Figure 18A) . This indicates the affinity to attract a large number of low degree nodes towards each hub, which is a strong evidence of controlling the topological properties of the network by these few hubs [59] . Interestingly, out of five significant hubs, four hubs (RPS6, NACA, HNRNPA1 and BTF3) present in module (Nodes: 16, Edges: 118, Score: 15.73) and one hub SUMO1 is present at motif level which considered one of the most important regulating motif of biological network at a fundamental level (Figure 18B) From the gene diseases association study few diseases are highly associated with these important hub proteins ( Figure 19A) ; HNRNPA1 (36%) followed by RPS6 (25%), SUMO1 (21%), BTF3 (9%) and NACA (9%) ( Figure 19B) . Clinically, patients with COVID-19 present with respiratory symptoms, Anoxia, fatigue, heart failure etc. are associated with these five hub proteins mainly HNRNPA1& SUMO1.
By hub removal methodology; we tried to understand the effect of hub removal and calculated the topological properties of the HPIN as a control. The probability of degree distribution P(k) showed that the HPIN followed a power law scaling behavior. The power law behavior was also checked and confirmed by using statistical test for power law fitting (p-value≥0.1) [60] in the hub-removal process. The hub removal analysis showed an important magnitude of changes in network metrics such as Degree distribution (Indegree & outdegree), Clustering coefficient and Neighborhood connectivity ( Figure 20A ). This shows that removing Perturbation of BFT3 shows minimum γ, indicating removal of BFT3 the network is less compactness, which may lead to the delay in flow of signal. In Neighbourhood connectivity with exponent µ which is maximum in removal of SUMO1 hub, which reveals that the regulating roles of remaining hubs become more important [61] . The increase in µ indicates that the information processing in the network becomes faster when SUMO1 hubs are removed which means that local perturbations due to hubs removal are strong enough to cause significant change in global scenario [62] (Figure 20B) . The knock out hubs experiment we performed, shows no drastic change in the topological properties of the perturbed network, but enhance the regulating capabilities of the modules than the hubs, which is the consequence of strong inter-links in the network.
Overall network analysis showed ACE2 is not only the key molecule for entry and survival of SARS-CoV-2 virus, the hub proteins like RPS6, HNRNPA1, SUMO1, NACA & BTF3 might also play a vital role. Analysing (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.050534 doi: bioRxiv preprint these interactions could provide further important understanding for the underlying biological mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 virus infection and identifying putative drug targets.
To conclude (Figure 3) , higher expression of ACE2 is facilitated by natural variations with different frequencies in different populations and functionally associated with expression of the gene. The higher expression of ACE2 facilitates homo-dimerization resulting in hindrance to TMPRSS2 mediated cleavage of ACE2. It becomes more difficult in presence of B0AT1 that usually does not express in Lungs. We also propose that the monomeric ACE2 has higher preferential binding with SARS-CoV-2 S-Protein vis-a-vis its dimerized counterpart. Further, natural variations in TMPRSS2, with potential functional role, and their differential frequencies may also result in differential outcomes towards interaction with ACE2 or priming of viral S-protein, a critical step for entry of Virus in host cells. In addition, we have identified some other potential key host genes like ADAM17, RPS6, HNRNPA1, SUMO1, NACA and BTF3, that might have a critical role. With all this background, it is anticipated that in populations like Indian populations, with highly diverse gene pool, a great variation in clinical outcomes is expected and that could be population/region specific, but primarily due to gene pool structure of the region, despite similar exposure levels to SARS CoV-2 and resources. Understanding these population specific differences may help in developing appropriate management strategies.
A multi chain complex of dimeric ACE2 is shown (colored as purple and forest green surface representation) bound to B0AT1 (colored as chocolate and orange surface) through its C terminal amino acids and SARS-CoV-2 RBD domain through its N terminal amino acids (shown as black and blue surface), the recognition site of TMPRSS2 is also highlighted as surface against the cartoon background from the intron 1 of ACE2 gene. GeneHancer regulator elements and interaction between GeneHancer regulatory elements as curved lines can be seen. In addition, it can be seen that all the proxy SNPs (in Brown) (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.050534 doi: bioRxiv preprint are clustered together within potential functional regulatory enhancer element and interaction region (in brown color). Lung eQTLs that overlapped with the common dbSNPs are shown and along r 2 values depicting LD in the region is plotted. All the SNPs appeared to cluster towards 3' end of the gene. Other annotations include GeneHancer regulator elements and interaction between GeneHancer regulatory elements as curved lines can be seen. (dark blue color for TMPRSS2 gene). Alternate splicing graph is also indicated.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.050534 doi: bioRxiv preprint shades show downregulation. It also depicts Linkage disequilibrium (LD) in region with value range from 0 to 1 as white to black shades with 1(dark) as absolute LD. Significant upregulation of the gene by eQTLs was observed in Pancreas whereas downregulation in Liver and no data on Lungs as it is reported not to be expressing in Lungs at GTEx portal. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.050534 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 19 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. 
