COVID-19 is an emerging and rapidly evolving pandemic around the world, which causes severe acute 5 respiratory syndrome and results in substantial morbidity and mortality. To examine the transmission dynamics of COVID-6 19 and its interactions with some exogenous factors such as limited medical resources and false detection problems, we 7 employ a simple epidemiological model and analyse this system using modelling and dynamical systems techniques. We 8 discover some contrasting findings with respect to the observations of basic reproduction number, and we investigate how 9 the issues of limited medical resources and false detection problems affect the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak. 10
2 resources component, which results in the possibility of under-testing issue. Inspired by the previous reports 5, 6 , 27 the problem of false detection (i.e., false negative tests) and the possibility of 'reinfection' are also investigated 28 by employing our Susceptible-Infected-Removed-Susceptible (SIRS)-type system, based on daily reported 29 cases in Malaysia, which is used a case study. 30 
To model the combined effects of limited medical resources and false detection problems in shaping the COVID-31 19 pandemic, we revisit a simple ordinary differential equation (ODE) model of SIRS-type 7-10 :
where population of N individuals are divided into three compartments: S(t) corresponds to susceptible 34 population, which can be infected (with transmission rate of β); I(t) corresponds to the number of infectious (i.e., if ω is smaller, then the efficiency is higher). In fact, this quantity also represents the efficiency of the 50 supply of available medical resources, and this situation would also depend on other factors such as the control 51 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.25.20079319 doi: medRxiv preprint strategies (e.g., quarantine, movement control order) and the production of drugs, etc. All of the parameters are 52 positive in this model to depict the biologically-meaningful phenomenon of transmission dynamics.
The model (1) has two types of steady states, which are disease-free and pandemic equilibria: (i) disease-54 free equilibrium, µN ν , 0, 0 ; (ii) pandemic equilibrium, (S * , I * , R * ). Local stability analysis is employed so as 55 to determine stability of each of these steady states. To obtain basic reproduction numbers, R 0 , we used the next 56 generation matrix method (and the correstness of these quantities are checked using eigenvalues analysis). The 57 simplest SIR system can obtained from the model (1) by letting µ = ν = ε = α = 0, with basic reproduction 58 number, R 0S , is as follows:
(2)
When the possibility of limited medical resources is relaxed (i.e., α = 0 and other parameters are positive), 61 basic reproduction number, R 0u , is given by:
.
(3) 63 Considering the case of a limited medical resources (i.e., α > 0), this situation leads to different threshold of 64 basic reproduction number, R 0L :
4 be less than 1, which in principle can eradicate this pandemic in a long run (Fig. 1B) . 
