The coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic is raging throughout the globe. In the United States alone, as of April 10, 2020, there were 560,933 cases along with 22, 127 deaths (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, CDC). 2 A mathematical model created by
The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) predicts that in the United States, assuming continued full social distancing, the number of new cases will peak in late April, and related deaths will peak by mid-to-late May. 3 This creates a critical and immediate need for medical treatment and resources.
Preliminary data in the US suggests that COVID-19 may be more infectious and lethal than Influenza H1N1. In the general population, current case-fatality rates for COVID-19 are about 3.9%, and infection rates are about 2.5 under normal conditions. 4 To place this in context, Figure 1 provides a comparison of the reproduction rate and case-fatality rates for major respiratory virus pandemics. 5-7 Data strongly emphasizes early intervention to reduce case-fatality and inhibit reproductive rates.
A number of articles have been published on the clinical course and treatment of the disease. 8-10 The majority of patients present with more than one symptom on admission, although the combination of fever, cough, and shortness of breath is rare. Siddiqi and Mehra proposed a staged progression model based on observed clinical courses in published studies. 11 In Stage 1, or the mild phase, the virus multiplies and establishes residence in the host, predominantly in the respiratory tract. In Stage 2, we see that viral multiplication and localized inflammation in the lungs is common. Stage 3 is marked by extra-pulmonary systemic hyperinflammation syndrome. The prognosis and recovery from Stage 3 is generally poor. Rapid . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 19.20071548 doi: medRxiv preprint recognition of what stage the patient is in and deployment of appropriate therapy may have the greatest yield.
Common correlates with poorer outcomes include age, hypertension, diabetes, coronary artery disease, chronic lung disease, and malignancies. 12 Research also finds variations in outcomes due to a dysregulated and exuberant immune response. Patients requiring intensive care have significantly higher levels of IL-6, CRP, ferritin, and D-Dimer. An important therapeutic modality may be to downregulate the cytokine storm, particularly in severe illness. 13 The literature also suggest that disease progression can be predicted. During the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) pandemic, a retrospective analysis revealed that 2-
week cumulative case data could help estimate the total case numbers with accuracy -well before the date of the last reported case. 14 As we have found, there is no unified framework linking disease progression to established viral levels, clinical tests, inflammatory markers, and investigational treatment options. Given that it may take many weeks or months to establish a standard treatment approach and there is a growing morbidity and mortality, we present an initial treatment approach based on a thorough review of currently available scholarly articles and clinical reports. Our focus is on staged progression, clinical algorithms, and individualized treatment.
We followed the protocol for a quality review article proposed by Heyn et al. 1 A literature search was conducted to find all relevant studies related to COVID-19. The search was conducted between April 1, 2020 and April 13, 2020 using the following electronic databases:
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. Clinicians and patients should understand the staged progression of COVID-19 ( Figure 2 ). As such, we present a treatment algorithm that recommends no treatment for some and specific treatment for others, depending on age, comorbidities, and symptom severity ( Figure 3 ).
Based on our thorough review of the literature, we correlated the disease course to COVID-19 testing, diagnostic options, and treatment strategies (see Figure 2 ). COVID-19 can be divided into three distinct Stages, beginning at the time of infection (Stage I), sometimes progressing to pulmonary involvement (Stage II, with or without hypoxemia) and less frequently to systemic inflammation (Stage III). We also created a treatment algorithm which considers age, comorbidities, clinical presentation, and disease progression to suggest drug classes or treatment modalities (see Figure 3 ). The specific treatments are summarized in Table   1 . . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 19.20071548 doi: medRxiv preprint
Data exists for early identification of cases at high risk of progression to severe COVID-19. One promising model created in China found that patients who developed severe COVID-19 possessed one of the following diseases: hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, chronic respiratory disease, or tuberculosis. The same model cited age and various serological indicators (such as C-reactive protein (CRP), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), bilirubin, and others) as factors associated with worse outcomes. 65 Additional research confirmed, in a case-control study, that subjects with high Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) scores, with age greater than 65, with hypertension, diabetes, and/or coronary heart disease were at greatest risk. 15 Lastly, Research focusing on viral load and survival found that higher initial viral load is independently associated with worse prognosis. 2
The most common presenting symptoms are fever and cough, followed by myalgia and fatigue. Less commonly, patients may present with sputum production, headache, or abdominal symptoms like diarrhea. 26 In terms of disease progression, a case study of the first five patients diagnosed with COVID-19 in Europe points the way to two different clinical evolutions of the disease: 1. Presenting few symptoms, but showing high viral load from the respiratory tract; 2. A two-step disease process, with worsening of symptoms around 10 days of symptom onset in spite of decreased viral load in respiratory samples. In our model we plot the disease progression as a function of infection, survivability, and inflammation ( Figure 2 ). We identify the inflection point where survival decreases as inflammation increasesapproximately day 10 from symptom onset. Support for this is found in research by Chen J, Qi T, . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. 31 Their research found that sepsis and ARDS in hospitalized patients starts around day 10 and 11, respectively. They also found temporal changes in inflammatory laboratory markers beginning at day 4 of illness onset. These included temporal changes in D-dimer, IL-6, serum ferritin, high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I, and lactate dehydrogenase. The differences were statistically significant between survivors and nonsurvivors for all time points. Figure 4 provides the percent change between survivors and nonsurvivors from day 4. In addition, Yang et al. 66 found that the patients admitted to the ICU with severe hypoxemia had a 50% probability of survival at day 7 of ICU admission (corresponding to Day ~17 in Figure 2 ).
The incubation period is on average 5 days. In most patients, initial presenting symptoms are mild (though a small number of patients can be asymptomatic throughout the course of the disease). Stage I symptoms include fever, cough, fatigue, and body aches, but, in a minority of cases can include headache, GI symptoms, anosmia, as well as others. Duration of initial symptoms is 5-7 days, correlating with a peak in viral load. 26 During this time, the appropriate diagnostic test is a nasopharyngeal PCR. Laboratory studies may include an elevated D-Dimer and prothrombin time, as well as lymphopenia (see Figure 2 ). Given that symptoms in this stage are mild, and correlated with viremia, the appropriate treatment modality is supportive care or an antiviral. Nevertheless, treatment must be individualized, based on a patient's age, comorbidities, presenting symptoms, and drug interactions (see Figure 3 and Table 1 ).
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. 
Some patients progress into Stage II, which is characterized by a decrease in viral levels and an increase in inflammation that initially localizes to the lungs. Infiltrates are typically seen on chest x-ray (CXR) or computed tomography (CT). Similar to symptom duration in Stage I, the typical symptom course in Stage II is also 5-7 days. Treatment with antivirals is still indicated, but given an average decrease in viral levels during this stage, that treatment is theoretically less effective than in Stage I. Moreover, Stage II is divided into two sub-stages (IIA and IIB), depending on whether a patient is hypoxemic or not. This distinction is important for management (see Figure 2 ). In Stage IIB, the patient is significantly dyspneic and may benefit, depending on age and comorbidities, from the use of corticosteroids or other antiinflammatory treatments (see Figure 3 ).
Although only a minority of patients (estimated at 10-15%) progress to Stage III, mortality within this stage is considerable (estimated at 20-30%). The morbidity and mortality are generally due to uncontrolled inflammation, which at this point is systemic. The most important symptom is respiratory distress (correlating in a typical patient to a Pulse Ox < 92%).
Laboratory markers include significantly increased CRP and IL-6 levels. [66] [67] As in Stage II, treatment may include anti-virals (if the patient is still viremic), but agents to counteract inflammation and its effects (such as microthrombi) must be considered (see Figure 2) . A summary of investigational therapies can be found in Table 1 .
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 19.20071548 doi: medRxiv preprint A number of clinical trials are exploring pre-exposure and post-exposure prophylaxis.
There is no definitive evidence that any particular treatment modality is effective but antivirals, hydroxychloroquine, and convalescent plasma are being proposed. Anti-virals, like Remdesivir, may proof beneficial at any stage of disease. [39] [40] Hydroxychloroquine is postulated to have antiviral properties, and it has been definitively proven as an immunomodulator. 32 Convalescent plasma provides the antibody support needed to envelope and destroy the virus while preventing the exuberant immune response or cytokine release that leads to significant pathology, particularly in Stages IIb and III. 23
This review has several limitations. First, the incredible volume and speed at which data is published about the treatment of COVID-19 indicates that research findings and recommendations may change. Second, the research used to create the review came from small studies, often-times with very few controls. Third, the articles were limited to Englishlanguage publications or translations, so relevant international data could be lacking.
This paper presents the first evidence-based recommendations for individualized treatment for COVID-19. Based upon the observed transmission and mortality rates, health professionals urgently need to align patient baseline risk to disease stage and investigational treatment options. The COVID-19 pandemic represents the greatest public health crisis in three generations; the need for comprehensive management cannot be overstated.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. .
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . 
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 19.20071548 doi: medRxiv preprint . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 24, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 19.20071548 doi: medRxiv preprint
