The novel SARS-CoV-2 virus causes COVID-19 and has resulted in 2.8 million confirmed cases and more than 196,000 deaths. Strikingly, 80-85% of patients are asymptomatic or have self-limiting disease. 1 The remaining require major hospital resources and threaten to collapse our healthcare system. The mechanisms underlying divergent COVID-19 outcomes are unknown.
Emerging health disparities data are potentially illuminating. In Louisiana, African Americans account for 70% of COVID-19 deaths despite representing only 32% of the population. 2 In a Boston homeless shelter, 100% of 147 COVID-19 positive subjects were asymptomatic. 3 The mechanisms underlying severe COVID-19 should account for both these findings, as well as other COVID-19 mortality risk factors: hypertension, obesity, male sex, advanced age, concentration in northern climates, and COVID-19 associated coagulopathy (CAC). 4, 5 Vitamin D insufficiency (VDI) meets every one of the above criteria. VDI affects 80-90% of the African American population. In contrast, homeless persons generally have poorer health and nutrition, but can have greater exposure to sunlight, the source of 80-90% of the body's vitamin D. 6 VDI causes essential hypertension and is associated with every COVID-19 mortality risk factor. 7, 8 Hydroxychloroquine raises plasma vitamin D levels. 9 Lastly, VDI induces a prothrombotic state and adversely impacts both innate and adaptive immune responses. To better define the VDI-COVID-19 link, we determined the prevalence of VDI among our COVID-19 intensive care unit (ICU) patients.
In an Institutional Review Board approved study performed at a single, tertiary care academic medical center, the medical records of COVID-19 patients between March 27, 2020 and April 21, 2020 were retrospectively reviewed. Subjects were included for whom serum 25-hydroxycholecalcifoerol (25OHD) levels were determined. COVID-19-relevant data were compiled and analyzed. The 25OHD assay was is highly prevalent in dark-skinned persons (82.1% of African Americans vs. 41.6% overall). In contrast, although U.S. homeless persons are generally considered to have poor health and decreased access to micronutrients that confer immune benefits, they usually have more exposure to sunlight, a key source of vitamin D production. In Europe, COVID-19 has been severe in Italy, Spain and Greece, but much less so in Scandinavian countries -this precisely recapitulates VDI data showing that Italy, Spain and Greece have VDI rates of 70-90%, vs. 15-30% in Norway and Denmark. 11 Scandinavian diets contain more vitamin D due to higher fatty fish intake and dairy products supplementation with vitamin D. 11 The baseline prevalence of VDI amongst ICU patients is 30-40%. 12 In this study, we found that 84.6% of COVID-19 ICU patients had VDI, vs. 57.1% of floor patients. Strikingly, 100% of ICU patients less than 75 years old had VDI. We also found that 62.5% had CAC, and 92.3% had lymphopenia. Given these data, we hypothesize that VDI enhances COVID-19 severity via 1) its prothrombotic effects and 2) its derangement of the immune response.
CAC is emerging as a key process in severe COVID-19. The American Society of Hematology recommends routine DVT prophylaxis for all admitted COVID-19 patients. 13 In Wuhan, CAC was present in 71.4% of non-survivors vs. 0.6% in survivors. 14 Non-survivors demonstrated significantly lower fibrinogen and antithrombin levels on admission, consistent with coagulation factor depletion induced by a hypercoagulable state. A meta-analysis of 1,779 COVID-19 patients reported that platelet counts were significantly lower in severe COVID-19, and that lower platelet counts were associated with mortality. 15 Anticoagulation can lower mortality: in patients with high SIC scores or D-dimer levels >6-fold the upper limit of normal, heparin reduced mortality to 40.0% vs. 64.2% in controls. 16 CAC's role is further evidenced by the multiorgan, microvascular clots in hospitalized COVID-19 patients, which include deep vein thromboses/pulmonary emboli, acute renal failure, cerebrovascular events, myocardial injury, ischemic stroke, and ischemic skin changes. 4 Microthromboses are found in extrapulmonary organs at a rate greater than in severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), another novel coronavirus. 17 All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.20075838 doi: medRxiv preprint VDI is prothrombotic, since Vitamin D receptor knockout (VDRKO) mice develop a CAC-like response to injury, with aggravated, multiorgan thrombosis following lipopolysaccharide injection. 18 Expression of antithrombin in the liver and thrombomodulin in the aorta, liver, and kidney were downregulated, whereas tissue factor expression was upregulated in the liver and kidney. In humans, VDI is associated with increased risk of CVD and death. 8 
Lymphocytopenia is a hallmark of severe COVID-19, suggesting a deranged immune response.
Convalescent plasma therapy, a form of passive therapy, can improve the deranged response. Convalescent therapy may improve the host response by reducing VDI or through a protective humoral response.
Differentiating these two possibilities is critical to identifying strategies for mitigating severe COVID-19.
VDI leads to deranged immune response, including to viral ARIs. In a study of over 14,000 individuals, VDI was associated with a 58% increase in ARI after controlling for seasonal, demographic, and clinical factors. 20 A form of macrophage activation syndrome (MAS), where macrophages are highly activated from the initial systemic inflammatory response to SARS-CoV, could be responsible for hyperferritinemia and lead to or exacerbate VDI. 21 It has been proposed that uncontrolled inflammation commonly leads to hyperferritinemia and likely results in immune dysregulation. 22 Hyperferritinemia appears to be due to the hemophagocytosis and hypercytokinemia observed in MAS. This clinical picture can result in a All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2020. . prothrombotic state that is consistent with hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis and can be observed as a consequence of viral infection. 23 Overall, these data suggest that an overly exuberant inflammatory response leads to VDI, hyperferritinemia and the prothrombotic state observed with COVID-19.
Vitamin D plays an essential role in modulating both the innate and adaptive immune response. 24, 25 If VDI correlates with severe COVID-19, it would likely explain the high frequency of severe disease in the >60
year old and African American population. Vitamin D-dependent antimicrobial pathways are induced in response to double-stranded RNA, as produced during SARS-CoV-2 replication. 26 These pathways upregulate antimicrobial peptides, including cathelicidin and -defensin, and autophagy. In macrophages and endothelial cells, cathelicidin production is modulated in a vitamin D dose-dependent manner. 27-29 IFN- is strongly antimicrobial and a key activator of these pathways, particularly for macrophages and other phagocytic cells, resulting in greater production of reactive oxygen through an oxidative burst and nitrogen species, in addition to these antimicrobial peptides. The over-utilization of these pathways by the host response to SARS-CoV-2 designed to control viral replication could be one mechanism by which VDI arises initially, but once VDI is present, this response becomes ineffective.
VDI prevents the ability of the host to activate these host defensive pathways, but has also been shown to play an important role in macrophage and lymphocyte migration. 30 Interestingly, the bioactive form of vitamin D, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 prevents experimental autoimmune encyphalomyelitis (EAE), suggesting that one aspect of the pathology associated with the final stages of deranged immunity observed in COVID-19 may be EAE through inflammation caused by uncontrolled trafficking of macrophages and T cells into the CNS. The massive influx of macrophages and T cells into peripheral organs, including the CNS, may represent the mechanism by which lymphocytopenia arises and could suggest an autoimmune component to the disease. The concept that COVID-19 may impact the CNS is supported by reports of loss of smell and taste by patients and the elevated incidence of ischemic stroke. 31,32
The Case Against VDI All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2020. .
While VDI is associated more frequently with ARIs, Vitamin D supplementation does not consistently show benefit against influenza. 33 However, these outbreaks were not marked by coagulopathy. Furthermore, previous trials did not identify subjects with VDI, thereby introducing a major confounding variable.
This small, retrospective observational study suggests a link between VDI and severe COVID-19.
Anecdotal and observational data indicate that VDI may play a significant role in the progression of the COVID-19 disease state. Low-risk, high-reward potential therapies that target CAC and VDI merit further investigation. Prospective, randomized controlled studies that properly risk-stratify subjects should be performed.
We appreciate the University Medical Center of New Orleans for providing access to their patient data.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 28, 2020. Table 3 . Similarities in demographic and risk factor associations between COVID-19 and Vitamin D Insufficiency. RR, relative risk; 25OHD, 25-hydroxycholecalcifoerol; CI, confidence interval; BMI, body mass index.
