Background: Japan's Prime Minister Abe declared an emergency to control the COVID-19 outbreak on April 7, 2020. He asked almost half of the population of Japan to reduce their personal contacts by 70-80%.
Object: This study estimates the effectiveness of that emergency declaration.
Method: We applied a simple susceptible-infected-recovery model to data of patients with symptoms in Tokyo, Japan for January 14 -April 21 as of April 22. We estimate the reproduction number in four periods: R 0 before voluntary event cancellation and school closure (VECSC) which was introduced since February 27 to March 19, R v during the VECSC, R a after VECSC, and R e after the emergency declaration.
: Results suggest that the value of R 0 was estimated as 1.267; its range was [1.214, 1.341]. However, R v was estimated as 2.360 [1.844, 2.623]. R a was estimated as 2.307 [2.035, 2.794] and R e was 0.462 [0.347, 0.514].
Discussion and Concussion: One must be reminded that these results reflect only those at two weeks after the emergency declaration. The reproduction number probably changed thereafter continuously. : medRxiv preprint 44.5% of Japan's population, to restrict their trips outside the home voluntarily.
Voluntary compliance means that the declared measures were not enforced as law.
People were not arrested even if they do not comply with this government declaration.
At the same time, the policy required the reduction of contact by 70-80%, based on the author's earlier research [2] . However, the share of the population cooperating with government requirements without law enforcement has remained uncertain. Therefore, this policy's effects must be evaluated as nearly and in as real-time a manner as possible.
If the reproduction number after the emergency declaration (R e ) is less than one, then the government would be able to rescind the declaration earlier. If greater than one, and especially of greater than two, then a more powerful policy, including law enforcement, might be necessary. Therefore, we undertook preliminary evaluation of the effect as of April 14, at one week after the declaration was issued.
Method All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Onset dates were sometimes unreported. Therefore, we estimated the onset date. To do so, we inferred a distribution of the length from onset to reporting based on patients for whom onset dates were available. Then we applied this empirical distribution to patients for whom onset dates were not available. Letting f(k) represent this empirical distribution and letting Nt denote the number of patients for whom onset dates were not available published at date t, then the number of patients for whom the onset date was : medRxiv preprint we estimated R a as the best fit to bootstrapped data in the post-VECSC period. Finally, based on the obtained R 0 , R v , and R a , we estimated R e as the best fit to a bootstrapped data after the emergency was declared. For each step, reproduction numbers were grid-searched in the interval of (0, 10) by 0.001 resolution.
Data used were the numbers of symptomatic patients in Tokyo, Japan during January 14 -April 22 reported by Tokyo Metropolitan Government (TMG) [6] as of April 23. During this period, 6084 cases with onset dates were reported. We excluded imported cases and those who were presumed to have been infected passengers and crew from the Diamond Princess: they were presumed not to be community-acquired cases in Japan. Of those, onset dates were available for 3734 cases; onset dates were not reported for other cases.
All information used for this study has been published. There is therefore no ethical issue related to this study. Figure 1 depicts the empirical distribution among incubation periods of 91 cases for which exposure dates and onset dates were reported by MHLW. Its mode was six days.
Its average was 6.6 days. Figure 2 depicts the empirical distribution of duration from onset to report. We adjusted the reporting delay based on this distribution. The value of R 0 before VECSC was introduced was estimated as 1.267; its range was [1.214, 1.341]. However, R v during the VECSC period when measures were introduced was estimated as 2.360 [1.844, 2.623]. After VECSC, R a was estimated as 2.307 [2.035, 2.794]. After the emergency declaration, R e decreased dramatically to be 0.462 [0.347, 0.514]. The null hypothesis that R v and R a were equal was not rejected,
however, all other pairs were equal was rejected at 5% significant level.
We applied a simple SIR model to all cases, including asymptomatic cases that had not been incorporated into the model to date. An earlier study [7-10] estimated R 0 for COVID-19 as 2.24-3.58 in Wuhan. Our R 0 obtained before VECSC was smaller than the previous studies , however, reproduction numbers in VECSC period and after VECSC were almost comparable. However, an earlier study [11] estimated R 0 in Japan All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Our previous study estimated R e in the first a week after the emergency declaration at nationwide was 0.083 [0.067, 0.105]. However, the present study in Tokyo in the two weeks after declaration was 0.758 [0.631, 0.879] Even it was lower than one, it increased to be ten time higher from a week in nationwide. It might suggest the effect of the emergency declaration has been gradually disappearing or in Tokyo, it was higher than in nationwide.
Moreover, reproduction number in the VECSC period and after VECSC were almost the same in Tokyo, though in nationwide, reproduction number in the VECSC period (1. 028 [0.965, 1.191]) was much smaller than after VECSC (3.237 [3.005, 3.441]). This might means that VECSC was ineffective in Tokyo but effective other than Tokyo. In this sense, the effect of the emergency declaration might weak in Tokyo comparison with other area.
One must be reminded that these results reflect only those at two weeks after the emergency declaration. The reproduction number probably changed thereafter All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. : medRxiv preprint continuously. Therefore, we have to monitor it carefully in the next two weeks when emergency declared and after disappeared the declaration.
Results demonstrated that the reproduction number declined in the two weeks after the emergency declaration to be less than one, however, it might increase since the first week. The reproduction number must be monitored carefully and continuously. We hope that the present study contributes to government decision-making about cessation of the emergency declaration.
This study was based on the authors' opinions. The analyses and results do not reflect any stance or policy of our affiliations.
We acknowledge the great efforts of all staff at public health centers, medical institutions, and other facilities who are fighting the spread and destruction associated with COVID-19.
To control the COVID-19 outbreak in Japan, the Prime Minister Abe declared an emergency on April 7 and applied countermeasures starting from April 8 [1] . The declared measures required residents of seven prefectures, collectively accounting for t-1. The number of patients for whom onset dates were not available was estimated as f(1)Nt. Similarly, the number of patients with onset date t-2 and whose onset dates were not available was estimated as f(2)Nt. Therefore, the total number of patients whose onset date were not available, given an onset date of s, was estimated as Σ k=1 f(k)Ns+k for a long time passed from s. Moreover, the reporting delay for published data from MHLW might be considerable. In other words, if s+k was larger than that in the current period t, then s+k represents the future for period t: thus Ns+k was not observable. Such a reporting delay causes an under-estimation bias in the number of patients. Therefore, we must adjust it as Σ k=1
t-s
Similarly, patients for whom the onset dates were available are expected to be affected by the reporting delay. Thus we have Ms|t /Σ k=1
Ms|t represents the reported number of patients for whom onset dates were within period s extending until the current period t.
We applied a simple susceptible-infected-recovery (SIR) model [3, 4] to the epidemic curve for Japan, with 120 million populations. We assume an incubation period calculated according to the empirical distribution.
Symptomatic and asymptomatic states continued for one week and then moved to a recovery state with probability of one. We are not concerned about outcomes or All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.20067447 doi: medRxiv preprint necessary medical resources in this model. Therefore, the state of death or hospitalization was not incorporated into the model. Asymptomatic cases cannot be observable unless complete laboratory-based surveillance is performed. One exceptional study found the asymptomatic cases to be 3/23 among elderly people [5] . For these analyses, the powers of infectivity among severe patients and mild patients were equal.
Moreover, we assumed that asymptomatic cases have the same power of infectivity as symptomatic cases have [5] . The distribution of infectiousness in symptomatic and asymptomatic cases was assumed to be 30% on the onset day, 20% the following day, and 10% for the next five days [5] .
We sought R 0 , R v, R a , and R e .to fit the data to minimize the sum of absolute values of discrepancies among the bootstrapped epidemic curve and the fitted values. The estimated distribution of three reproduction numbers was calculated using 10,000 iterations of bootstrapping from the empirical distribution of the data obtained for symptomatic patients.
We estimated the results sequentially as follows: We first estimated R 0 as the best fit to bootstrapped data in the pre-VECSC period. Then based on the obtained R 0 and course of the outbreak in the pre-VECSC period, we estimated R v as the best fit to bootstrapped data for the VECSC period. Similarly, based on the obtained R 0 and R v , All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.20067447 doi: medRxiv preprint
