As a novel coronavirus continues to spread widely and claim lives worldwide, its transmission characteristics remain uncertain. Here, we present and analyze the serial intervals-the time period between the onset of symptoms in an index (infector) case and the
We obtained publicly available data from 264 cities in mainland China on 9,120 reported COVID-19 infection events, which were accessible online as of February 19, 2020 . The data were collected from the websites of the provincial departments of public health and translated into English from Chinese (Appendix Table 1 ).We then searched the data for clearly 
For each infector-infectee pari, we measured the number of days between the reported symptom onset date of the infector and the recorded symptom onset date of the infectee.
Negative values suggest that the infectee developed symptoms before the infector. We then used the fitdist function in Matlab (8) to fit a normal distribution to all 339 observations. It provides reliable estimates of the mean and standard deviation, with 95% confidence intervals. We applied the same method to estimate the means and standard deviations after stratifying by whether the index case was infected locally or imported.
Page 3 of 15 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2020. 
We used maximum likelihood fitting and the Akaike information criterion (AIC) to evaluate four candidate models for the COVID-19 serial interval distributions: normal, lognormal, Weibull and gamma. Since our serial interval data includes a substantial number of non-positive values, we fit the four distributions both to truncated data in which all non-positive values are removed and to shifted data in which nine days are added to each observation (Appendix Figure 1, Appendix Tables 1,3) . The lognormal distribution provides the best fit for the truncated data (followed closely by the gamma and Weibull). However, we do not believe there is cause for excluding the non-positive data and would caution against making assessments and projections based on the truncated data. The normal distribution provides the best fit for the full dataset (shifted or not) and thus is the distribution we recommend for future epidemiologic assessments and planning.
To facilitate interpretation and future analyses, we summarize key characteristics of the COVID-2019 infection report dataset.
Of the 556 unique cases in the dataset, 1.3%, 2.2%, 51.08%, 32.01% and 13.49% were ages 0-4, 5-17, 18-49, 50-64, and over 65 years, respectively. Across all transmission events, approximately one third occurred between adults ages 18 to 49, ~94% had an adult infector (over 18), and 100% had an adult infectee (over 18) (Appendix Table 4 ). CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2020. The 339 transmission events were reported from 86 Chinese cities in 17 Chinese provinces and Tianjin (Appendix Figure 3 ). There are 18 cities with at least five infection events and 68 cities with fewer than five infection events in the sample. The maximum number of reports from a city is 36 for Xinyang, which reported 269 cumulative cases as of February 19, 2020.
This dataset is released by one comma-separated values (CSV) file, which has been uploaded to github ( MeyersLabUTexas/COVID-19 ). In the csv file, there are 21 columns ordered by index infection, secondary infection and source. The format for this file is the following.
• Event index: unique identifier for each infection event.
• Index ID: unique identifier for index reported case.
• Secondary ID: unique identifier for secondary reported case.
• City (Chinese): initial entry of name of the city in Chinese, in which the index and secondary cases are reported.
• City (English): initial entry of name of the city in English, in which the index and secondary cases are reported.
• Index -infection location (Chinese): initial entry of name of the city in Chinese, in which the index case is infected. • Secondary -infection location (Chinese): initial entry of name of the city in Chinese, in which the secondary case is infected.
• Secondary-infection location (English): initial entry of name of the city in English, in which the secondary case is infected.
• Secondary -symptom onset date: date following ISO 8601 format (YYYY-MM-DD) when the index case had symptom onset.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2020. . 
Thirty-three of the 339 cases suggest that the infectee had earlier symptoms than the infection. Therefore, there may be presymptomatic transmission. Because of these negative serial intervals, the COVID-19 serial intervals are better fit by normal distributions than the generally assumed gamma or Weibull distributions (10, 11) , which are limited to positive values (Appendix). Assuming a normal distribution, we predict a mean serial interval for COVID-19 of 5.29 days (95% CI 4.72-5.86) with an SD of 5.32 days (95% CI 4.95-5.75) ( Figure 1 ), which is significantly lower than the mean serial intervals of 8.4 days recorded for extreme acute respiratory syndrome (11) and 12.6 days (12) CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2020. . We note in our estimates four possible causes of bias (19) . First, the data is restricted to online records of reported cases and thus could be skewed towards more serious cases in areas with high-functioning healthcare and public health systems. The rapid isolation of these case-patients may have avoided longer serial intervals, possibly moving our estimate downward relative to the serial intervals that could be found in an uncontrolled outbreak.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2020. Second, the distribution of serial intervals varies during an outbreak, with time contracting around the outbreak peak between successive cases (20) . A susceptible person would possibly get infected faster if they are surrounded by two rather than one infected person.
Since our projections are mainly based on transmission events recorded during the early stages of outbreaks, we do not specifically account for such fragmentation and view the figures at the start of an epidemic as simple serial intervals. However, if any of the recorded infections occurred in the midst of increasing clusters of cases, our estimates may represent successful (compressed) serial intervals anticipated during an epidemic growth period. Third, each infector's identity and timing of the onset of symptoms is probably based on an individual memory of past events. If the precision of the recall is impeded by time or trauma, case-patients may be more likely to relate infection over prior experiences (longer serial intervals) to recent experiences (short serial interval). By comparison, the recorded serial intervals may be skewed upwards by travel-related transmission delays from primary case patients infected in Wuhan or another city before returning home. If their infectious cycle begins while traveling, then we may not be able to detect events of early transmission with shorter serial intervals.
Given the heterogeneity in the nature and reliability of these reports, we caution that our findings should be viewed as working hypotheses concerning COVID-19 infectiousness, which require further testing as more data become accessible. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2020. . . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2020. .
