The COVID-19 pandemic and the consequential societal changes are likely to have major health consequences way beyond those caused by the virus infection (1) . One of the medical fields that may experience significant consequences of the pandemic is that of psychiatry (2) (3) (4) . Importantly, individuals who already live with mental disorders may be particularly vulnerable to the psychological stress associated with the pandemic (4, 5) . However, data on how the COVID-19 pandemic affects this group of people is largely absent from the literature. Here, we report data from an investigation conducted at the psychiatric services of the Central Denmark Region (CDR), which has a catchment area of approximately 1.3 million people covered by five psychiatric hospitals providing inpatient and outpatient treatment of all types of mental disorders. Based on clinical observation and evidence of the psychological effects of both the current (6) and past (2) pandemics, we expected to find examples of "pandemic-related" symptoms of anxiety, obsessivecompulsive disorder, depression and psychotic disorders (e.g. schizophrenia).
We extracted all clinical notes from the period from February 1 st to March 23 rd 2020 (first verified case of COVID-19 in Denmark was reported on February 26 th 2020) (7) from the electronic medical record system used by the psychiatric services of the CDR for individuals (patients) aged 18 or above.
In this period there were 412,804 clinical notes reporting on a total of 14,561 adult patients in the psychiatric services of the CDR. Subsequently, we conducted an electronic search for clinical notes containing at least one of the following words: "corona", "COVID", "virus", "epidemic", "pandemic", and "contaminate/contamination" (including compound words). A total of 11,072 clinical notes contained at least one of these six pandemic-related words. Then, these 11,072 clinical notes were screened manually (5514 screened by CR and 5558 screened by OHJ) to determine whether they described symptoms that seemed plausibly related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Specifically, the clinical notes were labeled with "0" (no pandemic-related psychiatric symptoms), "1" (possible pandemic-related psychiatric symptom) or "2" (pandemic-related psychiatric symptom). All clinical notes labeled 1 were reassessed by both CR and OHJ and relabeled as either 0 or 2 (lack of consensus was resolved by discussion and/or consultation with SDØ). Throughout this process, it was attempted to distinguish between reactions to the pandemic, which appeared rational and reactions, which seemed pathological. This distinction relied on the use of qualifiers (e.g. "very worried" vs. "somewhat worried"), descriptions of worsening of otherwise stable psychopathology . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.20067744 doi: medRxiv preprint (e.g. "more hopelessness than usual" in a patient with depression), and was based on available knowledge of other patient characteristics (e.g. worries about potential COVID-19 contamination in a patient with severe asthma (not pathological) vs. in a patient with obsessive-compulsive disorder (pathological)). The screening and labeling process outlined above is illustrated in Supplementary . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. .
To our knowledge, this is the first investigation of COVID-19 pandemic-related psychopathology from a large psychiatric treatment setting. The results clearly suggest that this phenomenon exists among individuals with mental illness (2) (3) (4) . However, as the data from this investigation stems from standard clinical practice where the patients were not systematically assessed for pandemic-related psychopathology, we cannot speak to its overall prevalence. Nevertheless, we believe that our findings underline the necessity of taking urgent action to mitigate the negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on individuals with mental disorders. A low-cost intervention would be to simply discuss the ongoing pandemic and its societal consequences with patients seeking care in psychiatric settings -as this may lead to relief of pandemic-related symptoms via general comforting, and clarification of misunderstandings/false beliefs regarding the pandemic. This is also the advice we have provided to our colleagues in the CDR based on these findings. As an example, we have phrased three questions that can be used by the staff to initiate a conversation on the COVID-19 pandemic with their patients:
-"How do you feel regarding all the things that are currently happening with regard to the coronavirus?"
-"Worrying comes easily these days due to the focus on the coronavirus. Is that something your are experiencing too?" -"Many things are different these days due to the coronavirus and it can be difficult to maintain a routine -and do things that one enjoys. How are you doing in that regard?"
It is our hope that this initiative will aid our colleagues in detecting and addressing any COVID-19 pandemic-related symptoms that their patients may be experiencing.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. .
The nationwide lockdown announced on March 11th 2020 involved closure of kindergartens, schools, teaching institutions, restaurants, bars and many other small businesses. On March 23 rd 2020, the lockdown was extended to April 14 th 2020. ICD-10: International Classification of Diseases -10th Revision.
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.20067744 doi: medRxiv preprint
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)
The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.20067744 doi: medRxiv preprint
