The World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 epidemic a public health emergency of international concern on March 11th, 2020, and the pandemic is rapidly spreading worldwide.
COVID-19 is caused by a novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, which enters human target cells via angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). We used a number of bioinformatics tools to computationally characterize ACE2 by determining its cell-specific expression, putative functions, and transcriptional regulation. The small intestine expressed higher levels of ACE2 than any other organ. The large intestine, kidney and testis showed moderate signals, whereas the signal was weak in the lung specimens. Single cell RNA-Seq data indicated positive signals along the respiratory tract in the key protective cell types including the goblet and ciliary epithelial cells, as well as in the endothelial cells and type I pneumocytes. Gene ontology analysis suggested that, besides its classical role in renin-angiotensin system, ACE2 may be functionally associated with angiogenesis/blood vessel morphogenesis. A novel tool for the prediction of transcription factor binding sites identified several putative sites for determined transcription factors within the ACE2 gene promoter. Our results also confirmed that age and gender play no significant role in the regulation of ACE2 mRNA expression in the lung.
A zinc metalloenzyme, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) was discovered 64 years ago and first named as a hypertension-converting enzyme (1) . Classically, ACE is well known for its roles in the regulation of arterial pressure through conversion of angiotensin I to active angiotensin II and cleavage of bradykinin and neurotensin (2) . As a zinc metalloenzyme ACE belongs to a large cluster of zinc-binding proteins. The first zinc metalloenzyme, carbonic anhydrase was discovered in 1932 by Meldrum and Roughton (3) and thereafter thousands of such metalloenzymes have been reported in different species of all phyla (4, 5) .
The clinical characteristics of COVID-19 infection have recently been described based on data from 1,099 patients from mainland China (21) . It was found that the clinical characteristics of COVID-19 mimic those of SARS-CoV-1 infection. The most dominant symptoms include fever, cough, fatigue, and sputum production, whereas gastrointestinal symptoms are uncommon. In laboratory parameters, lymphopenia was detected in 83.2% of patients on admission. According to another recent survey of 278 patients with pneumonia caused by SARS-CoV-2, fever was the most common symptom, followed by cough (22) . Bilateral pneumonia has been detected by computed tomography scans in 67.0% of patients (23). A recent study from Wuhan, China listed the most common clinical complications determined in critically ill COVID-19 patients (24). The complications during exacerbation included acute respiratory distress syndrome and respiratory failure, sepsis, acute cardiac injury, and heart failure.
Data on the localization of virus receptors can provide insight into mechanisms of virus entry, tissue tropism, and pathogenesis of the disease. Therefore, it is of particular interest to correlate COVID-19 symptoms with the distribution pattern of ACE2. The first studies performed by northern blotting indicated that ACE2 is located in the human heart, kidney, and testis (2) . By immunohistochemistry, the expression of the ACE2 protein was identified in the human lung alveolar epithelial cells (type I and II pneumocytes), enterocytes of the small intestine, the brush border of the renal proximal tubules, and the endothelial cells of arteries and veins and arterial smooth muscle cells in several organs (25). It was proposed that this distribution pattern of ACE2 could explain the tissue tropism of SARS-CoV-1 for the lung, small intestine, and kidney (26). On the other hand, the symptoms of COVID-19, in contrast to SARS-CoV-1 infection, are not associated to the same extent with the gastrointestinal tract in spite of the high expression of ACE2 in the intestinal enterocytes (27). In COVID-19, diarrhea has been reported in just 3.8% of patients, in contrast to 40-70% in SARS-CoV-1 infection (21, 28) . A recent preprint report indicated diarrhea in 18.1% of 254 COVID-19 patients (29).
There are conflicting reports on the expression of ACE2 in the upper respiratory tract (28).
Hamming and coworkers found that only the basal layer of nonkeratinized squamous epithelium shows positive signal (25), whereas Sims and colleagues demonstrated ACE2 expression on the luminal surface of ciliated cells in freshly excised human nasal and tracheobronchial tissue (30).
Ren and coworkers showed weak ACE2-positive signal in the epithelial cells of trachea and main bronchus (31). Although lymphopenia is a typical feature of SARS (21, 28) , ACE2 is not highly expressed on T or B cells or macrophages in the spleen or lymphoid organs (25). 
In each of the tissues present in the GTEx dataset, expression values for ACE2 were compared with expression of all other genes by Spearman correlation analysis using the SciPy (34) Python library to identify those genes with concordant expression patterns. Bonferroni correction was used to derive an adjusted p-value threshold of 9.158E-07. For each tissue, those genes which both satisfied the Bonferroni-adjusted p-value threshold and had a correlation of expression of 0.50 or greater were analyzed using the Gprofiler gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis (35) Python library to identify possible enriched terms in biological process (BP), molecular function (MF), cellular component (CC), human phenotype (HP), KEGG pathway, and WikiPathways (WP) ontologies.
Immunohistochemical localization of human ACE2 was evaluated from immunostained specimens provided by Protein Expression Atlas (https://www.proteinatlas.org/). The images of the Figure 2 represent duodenum from 77-years-old female, kidney from 36-years-old male, testis from 38years-old male, lung from 61-years-old female, and nasopharyngeal mucosa from 78-years-old female. According to Protein Expression Atlas the immunostainings were performed with the rabbit anti-human polyclonal antibody (HPA000288; Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) raised against 111 Nterminal amino acids of ACE2 and diluted 1:250 for the staining. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.13.038752 doi: bioRxiv preprint
Analysis of ACE2 promoter regions was performed using the TFBSfootprinter tool (https://github.com/thirtysix/TFBS_footprinting). Previous studies identified two distinct tissuespecific transcription start sites (TSS) for intestine and lung expression (36), which correspond to primary protein-coding Ensembl transcripts ENST00000252519 and ENST00000427411, respectively. These two transcripts were targeted for transcription factor binding site (TFBS) analysis; input parameters of 1,000 base pairs (bp) upstream and 200 bp downstream, relative to the TSS.
Single-cell expression datasets were identified for relevant tissues/cells of trachea (mouse) (37) and lung epithelium (mouse) (38). Using a modified workflow described previously in (39), samples were filtered by Gaussian fit of read count, expressed gene count, and number of cells in which a gene is expressed. Counts were normalized by cell, log transformed, principle component analysis performed with 15 components, and k-nearest neighbors computed using SCANPY (40), and then the full data set normalized with R package 'scran' (41). Batch correction by individual and sample region was performed with SCANPY. The top 1,000 genes with highly differential expression were identified for cluster analysis which was performed with Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) and force directed graph models. The top 100 marker genes were identified as those with higher expression unique to each cluster by Welch t-test in SCANPY. Expression of the ACE2 gene was mapped onto cluster figures to determine overlap with previously identified cell types or cell type marker genes identified in the literature. Cell type was mapped by expression of known marker genes of cell types expressed in the lung and small intestine, as defined by lists derived from the literature as curated in the CellMarker database (42).
Comparisons of ACE2 expression values in different tissues and between groups delineated by age or sex, were carried out by one-way ANOVA using the stats package in the SciPy (34) Python library. Only groups with 20 or more observations and a 2-sided chi squared probability of normality of <=0.1 (due to the robustness of ANOVA to non-normal distributions) were used for . CC-BY 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.13.038752 doi: bioRxiv preprint comparison. Correlation of gene expression values was calculated by two-sided Spearman rankorder analysis, where a Bonferroni-corrected p-value threshold was computed using α=0.05/number of comparisons. Gene ontology enrichment analyses performed using the GProfiler tool utilize a custom algorithm for multiple testing of dependent results, which corresponds to an experimentwide threshold of α=0.05. TFBSfootprinter analysis of the ACE2 promoter limits results for individual TFBSs whose score satisfies a genome-wide threshold of α=0.01.
. CC-BY 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.13.038752 doi: bioRxiv preprint
The first aim of our study was to investigate different human tissues using publicly available datasets for the distribution of ACE2 mRNA and protein. In the FANTOM5 dataset, the highest values for ACE2 mRNA, ranked according to signal intensity, were seen for the small intestine, dura mater, colon, testis, thalamus, and rectum ( Fig. 1) . The seminiferous tubules and interstitial cells of testis also demonstrated strong immunostaining.
No immunoreactions for ACE2 were observed in the lung specimens. Very weak signal, associated with apical membranes, was detected in sporadic ciliary cells of a nasopharyngeal mucosa sample.
Although the evaluation of immunostaining reaction is generally considered semiquantitative at most, the results seem to correlate fairly well with the corresponding mRNA expression levels.
The respiratory tract is the main target region that is affected by COVID-19 infection. Bulk RNA-Seq data from lung specimens showed low expression levels for ACE2 ( Fig. 1 ). Therefore, we performed an analysis of single cell RNA-Seq using a mouse tracheal dataset, representing a more proximal segment of the respiratory tract. Figure 3 shows the expression of ACE2 mRNA in identified cell types. The highest number of ACE2-positive cells included the goblet cells, ciliary epithelial cells, endothelial cells, and type I pneumocytes (AT1 cells). There were also sporadic positive cells in the club cell category.
Since both the lung and intestine contain goblet cells, we decided to analyze another single cell RNA-Seq dataset covering mouse intestinal epithelial cells. Figure 4 indicates the highest levels of ACE2 mRNA signal in the absorptive enterocytes, whereas the intestinal goblet cells mostly remain negative.
. CC-BY 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.13.038752 doi: bioRxiv preprint
Since both age and gender may contribute to onset and severity of COVID-19 symptoms we aimed to investigate the effect of these variables on the expression levels of ACE2 mRNA. Figure 5 indicates that some tissues showed a slight trend to lower expression in older age categories.
Among all tested tissues, statistically significant differences between the age categories were seen in the tibial nerve (p=8.58 x 10 -6 ), minor salivary gland (p=0.002), aorta (p=0.003), whole blood (p=0.005), transverse colon (p=0.010), hypothalamus (p=0.039), and sun exposed skin (p=0.046).
Importantly, the lung specimens showed no significant difference of ACE2 mRNA expression between different age categories (p=0.681). Complete data on ACE mRNA expression levels in different age categories are shown in Supplementary Table 1. To make a binary comparison of expression by age, samples were divided into groups of ≤45 and >45 years of age. In comparison of these younger and older age groups, significant differences in expression were found in tibial nerve (p=2.47 x 10 -7 ), whole blood (p=3.21 x 10 -4 ), minor salivary gland (p=4.89 x 10 -4 ), sun exposed skin (p=0.003), transverse colon (p=0.022), testis (p=0.025), esophageal muscle layer (p=0.040), and subcutaneous adipose tissue (p=0.045).
The ACE2 mRNA levels largely overlapped between male and female sexes as shown in Figure 6 .
In the lung, no statistically significant difference was observed in the expression levels between the male and female subjects (p=0.908). Statistically significant differences were observed in the adipose tissue (p=0.0001), whole blood (p=0.0002), amygdala (p=0.0006), transverse colon (p=0.0008), muscle layer of esophagus (p=0.002), left ventricle of heart (p=0.005), Epstein-Barr virus-transformed lymphocytes (p=0.015), and esophagus-gastroesophageal junction (p=0.024).
Notably, there was no clear sex-specific trend pointing to one direction in all these cases. ACE mRNA expression levels in all studied tissues sorted according to subjects´ gender are shown in Supplementary Table 2 . The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.13.038752 doi: bioRxiv preprint terminal ileum), FOXA1 (cervix, colon, terminal ileum), HNF4A (colon, terminal ileum), FOXA2 (colon, kidney), NR2F6 (colon, kidney, terminal ileum), and SOX11 (kidney). In addition, two of the TFs are highly negatively correlated with ACE2 expression DUX4 (kidney) and FOXA1 (kidney). Full prediction results are included as Supplementary Table 3 The lung-specific transcript TSS aligns with the p3@ACE2 FANTOM5 dataset CAGE peak, which indicates that the expression of this transcript is much lower than the intestinal transcript, which corresponds with p1@ACE2 and p2@ACE2 FANTOM5 CAGE peaks. Common between the two tissue-specific transcripts, are predictions for CDX2 and HNF-family transcription factors.
Coexpression analysis identified numerous genes in ileum, testis, colon, and kidney which are highly correlated (>0.8) with ACE2 (Table 1; Supplementary Table 5 
The predominant pathological features of COVID-19 infection largely mimic those previously reported for SARS-CoV-1 infection. They include dry cough, persistent fever, progressive dyspnea, and in some cases acute exacerbation of lung function with bilateral pneumonia (30). Major lung lesions include several pathological signs, such as diffuse alveolar damage, inflammatory exudation in the alveoli and interstitial tissue, hyperplasia of fibrous tissue, and eventually lung fibrosis (43) (44) (45) . It has been shown by fluorescence in situ hybridization technique that SARS-CoV-1 RNA locates to the alveolar pneumocytes and alveolar space (46, 47) . Considering all these facts, it is not surprising that most histopathological analyses have been focused on distal parts of the respiratory airways, while the regions other than the alveolus have been less systematically studied. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.13.038752 doi: bioRxiv preprint intermediate cells between goblet, ciliated, and club cells. If SARS-coronaviruses predominantly attack these cells, locating along the airway segments including the trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles until the last segment that is the respiratory bronchioles, it would be obvious that physiological protective mechanisms are severely affected. Defective mucosal protection and inefficient removal of pathogens due to viral infection may contribute to onset of severe bilateral pneumonia that is common for SARS-diseases (51) . This pathogenic mechanism is supported by previous findings, showing that early disease is manifested as a bronchiolar disease with respiratory epithelial cell necrosis, loss of cilia, squamous cell metaplasia, and intrabronchiolar fibrin deposits When we initiated the present study, we hypothesized that understanding better the transcriptional regulation of the ACE2 gene might help to explain the peculiar distribution pattern of ACE2 in tissues. Since upregulation of ACE2 would reflect an increased number of SARS-coronavirus receptors on cell surfaces, it could possibly help us to understand the mechanisms why certain patients (males more than females, old more than young, smokers more than non-smokers) are more susceptible for the most detrimental effects of the COVID-19 infection. In our study, the signals for ACE2 mRNA in the lung specimens did not vary much in different age groups nor did they show significant differences between males and females, which is in line with the previous findings (48) .
Therefore, different expression levels of lung ACE2 may not explain the variable outcome of the disease concerning age groups and genders.
To investigate the transcriptional regulation of ACE2 gene we made predictions for the binding sites of transcription factors within the proximal promoter region of the intestine-specific and lungspecific human ACE2 transcript promoters. Our findings introduced several putative binding sites in the ACE2 promoter for known transcription factors, which showed high levels of coexpression with ACE2 in several tissues including the ileum, colon, and kidney. The identified transcription factors . CC-BY 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.13.038752 doi: bioRxiv preprint could represent potential candidate target molecules which regulate ACE2 expression. Two of our predictions, for HNF1A and HNF1B have been previously identified experimentally to drive ACE2 expression in pancreatic islet cells and insulinoma cells, respectively (36). Later work by the same group has shown that our prediction of FOXA binding sites in the ACE2 promoter are also likely correct (54) . It is of interest that ACE2 might be regulated by oxygen status. Zhang and coworkers previously demonstrated that ACE2 mRNA and protein levels increased during the early stages of hypoxia and decreased to near-baseline levels at later stages after hypoxia inducible factor (HIF)-1α accumulation (55) . Based on these findings ACE2 has been listed as a HIF1α-target gene (56), although it does not follow the typical HIF1α regulated expression pattern, nor is there any predicted HIF1α binding site in our analyses.
The regulation of ACE2 expression remains an enigma and there may be multiple factors involved.
There has been a concern that the use of ACE inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers could increase the expression of ACE2 and increase patient susceptibility to viral host cell entry (57) .
Previous studies have suggested that both ACE inhibitor and angiotensin II receptor type I antagonist therapies increase ACE2 mRNA expression in the rat heart (58) . There has also been some evidence in humans showing increased expression of ACE2 in the heart, brain, and even in urine after treatment with angiotensin receptor blockers (57) . Since these drugs are widely used for treatment of hypertension and heart failure, it would be important to determine in COVID-19 patients whether these medications have any significant effects on symptoms or outcome of the disease.
Gene ontology investigations revealed interesting novel data on potential physiological roles of ACE2. The five most significant gene ontology terms included angiogenesis, blood vessel morphogenesis, vasculature development, cardiovascular system development, and blood vessel development. Our analysis of single cell RNA-Seq data suggested that ACE2 is positively, though weakly, expressed in the endothelial cells. In another study, ACE2 expression was previously detected in blood vessels (25), and a recent study showed that SARS-CoV-2 is capable of directly infecting blood vessel cells (11) . Based on the present finding angiogenesis/blood vessel morphogenesis may be considered a putative function for ACE2 in addition to its classical role as the key angiotensin-(1-7) forming enzyme (59) . The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.13.038752 doi: bioRxiv preprint dataset we studied included neither the AT2 nor secretory3 cells that have been recently shown positive for ACE2 (48) . The results suggest that SARS-CoV infection may target the cell types that are important for the protection of airway mucosa and their damage may lead to deterioration of epithelial cell function, finally leading to a more severe lung disease with accumulation of alveolar exudate and inflammatory cells and lung edema, the signs of pneumonia recently described in the lung specimens of two patients with COVID-19 infection (60) . Gene ontology analysis suggested that ACE2 is involved in angiogenesis/blood vessel morphogenesis processes in addition to its classical function in renin-angiotensin system. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.13.038752 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 2 . Immunohistochemical localization of ACE2 protein in selected human tissues. In the duodenum (A), the protein is most strongly localized to the apical plasma membrane of absorptive enterocytes (arrows). The goblet cells (arrowheads) show weaker apical staining. Intracellular staining is confined to the absorptive enterocytes. In the kidney (B), ACE2 shows prominent apical staining in the epithelial cells of the proximal convoluted tubules (arrows) and Bowman´s capsule epithelium (arrowheads). The distal convoluted tubules are negative (asterisk). The testis specimen (C) shows strong immunostaining in the seminiferous tubules (arrows) and interstitial cells (arrowheads). The lung sample (D) is negative. In the nasopharyngeal mucosa (E), ACE2 signal is very weak and only occasional epithelial cells show weak signals (arrows). Immunostained specimens were from Protein Expression Atlas (https://www.proteinatlas.org/). The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.13.038752 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 3 . Single cell RNA-Seq analysis of different cell types from the respiratory tract (mouse tracheal epithelium), derived from data from GEO dataset GSE103354 (37). Cell types were determined using markers as defined in the CellMarker database, as collected from the literature. ACE2 mRNA expression is shown for comparison in upper panel. UMAP dimensionality reduction plot was computed and visualized in ScanPy (40).
. CC-BY 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.13.038752 doi: bioRxiv preprint The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.13.038752 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 5 . Effect of age on ACE2 mRNA expression levels. Data is extracted from the GTEx dataset as TPM. In these organs, ANOVA revealed significant differences between age categories in tibial nerve (p=8.58 x 10 -6 ), minor salivary gland (p=0.002), and whole blood (p=0.005). In other tissues, the differences did not reach statistical significance. The highest TPM values are seen the small intestine, testis, and kidney.
. CC-BY 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.13.038752 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 6 . Effect of gender on ACE2 mRNA expression levels. Data is extracted from the GTEx dataset as TPM. The expression levels in males and females overlap in all tissue categories. Statistically significant differences studied by ANOVA analysis were determined in esophagusgastroesophageal junction (p=0.024) and whole blood (p=0.0002). The ACE2 mRNA expression levels in testis specimens are shown here for comparison. 1=male, 2=female.
. CC-BY 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.13.038752 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 7 . Prediction of transcription factor binding sites in the human ACE2 gene promoter regions of Ensembl transcripts ENST00000252519 and ENST00000427411 using TFBSfootprinter. A) Promoter region of the intestine specific ACE2 transcript. The results show putative binding sites for several transcription factors which have a strong correlation of expression with ACE2 in colon, kidney, and ileum. The predicted binding sites overlap regions of conservation in mammal species (Ensembl GERP), and cluster within 400 base pairs (bp) of the transcription start site. B) Promoter region of the lung specific ACE2 transcript. The predicted binding sites cluster within 200 bp of the TSS and overlap regions of conservation in mammal species, ATAC-Seq peaks (ENCODE), and TFBS metaclusters (GTRD).
. CC-BY 4.0 International license author/funder. It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.13.038752 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 8 . Expression of ACE2 highly correlated other genes in single cell datasets of trachea and intestinal epithelia. Trachea expression data is taken from GSE103354 (37) and intestinal epithelia data is derived from GSE92332 (61) . Visualized in ScanPy (40). Table 2 . Gene ontology annotation results for the processes associated with genes strongly coexpressed (≥0.5) with ACE2 across all tissues in GTEx dataset.
